5084641 <h> Wish I Was in Heaven Sitting Down songs Product Information <h> Wish I Was in Heaven Sitting Down album Product Description <p> Wish I Was in Heaven Sitting Down album by RL Burnside was released Oct 24, 2000 on the Fat Possum label. Legendary bluesman turned unlikely indie-rock hero R.L. Burnside returns with a set that splits the difference between the Beck-derived post-modernisms of his previous COME ON IN and more traditional Delta stylings. Wish I Was in Heaven Sitting Down songs Fortunately, Burnside is such a strong artist that he sounds equally at home with either approach. <p> The honkytonk-ish " My Eyes Keep Me in Trouble, " for example, pairs mandolin with sampled drums. Blues purists will no doubt prefer the title track, an ancient-sounding near-field holler performed by Burnside and his adopted son Kenny Brown on acoustic guitar. Others will appreciate such highlights as the magnificently spooky version of Skip James ' " Hard Time Killing Floor ; " an astonishing guitar-driven re-imagining of Don Covay 's " Chain of Fools ; " and " Nothing Man, " which chugs along on a great @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Was in Heaven Sitting Down music CDs Customer Reviews <p> My first experience with R.L. I first heard R.L. on Pandora internet radio, track four " Wish I was in Heaven Sitting Down ". My ears tuned in quickly to his dirt blues acoustic guitar. I could almost see an aged man sitting on an old porch with his trusty old guitar tracing the strings in a familiar fashion as he had done for so many years before. Then his vocals came into que just as your ears would have expected. I sat and listened to the track as the hair on the back of my neck stood up. As soon as the song was over I immediately got online and ordered the album. Upon receiving and listening to the album I was somewhat confused as R.L. had dome something I 've yet to hear myself done on a blues album. My interpretation was an excellent blues musician meets a talented new age producer. Together they pave the way for what could be interpreted as an Moby-esque evolution of 
