4025341 The examination of boundary processes is a central issue in the study of ethnicity but this approach often favors external, socio-political boundaries that stem from historical forces at the expense of indigenous accounts about cultural differences. In this paper, I propose that Teenek symbolic spatial organization enables us to examine ethnicity as simultaneously a set of social relations and a structure of meaning. The analysis stresses the significance and contents of the dialogical relationships between external social boundaries and internal, symbolic ones. Analyzing the interrelation of both types of boundaries reveals how historical forces have shaped the cultural idiom in which Teenek people metaphorically apprehend their social interethnic configuration. Keywords : Ethnicity ; boundary processes ; symbolic construction ; space ; Teenek Indians ; Mexico " A person has to know the land intimately to locate a community that is not visually marked "( Blu 1996 : 226). In 1991, at the beginning of my 30-month long fieldwork(n1) in the multi ethnic Huasteca region north of the State of Veracruz in northeastern Mexico, I spent my days walking across Tantoyuca county( municipio) environs, in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ /te:nek/) or Huastec community from which to conduct my intended research on the extreme marginalization of this people, from their own point of view. Tantoyuca municipio ranks in the top quarter of the most marginalized in the country and its Teenek population( 48,741in 2000) amounts to roughly half of the total county 's population.( n2) However, although there were no apparent external distinctions between the poor Mestizo neighborhoods on the town 's outskirts and the Teenek Indians ' hamlets in the surrounding area, I recall being struck by the sense of crossing invisible boundaries. Whenever I approached the confines of the Teenek villages, everyone fled and hid, closing the doors as if faced with an approaching storm. Children ran toward their huts, crying loudly, ejek, ejek( " Spanish, " " Mestizo " = " non-Indian "). These reactions perplexed me. We were, after all, at the end of the twentieth century and a few kilometers from a national highway and a large town, yet the burden @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ relationships with strangers. But, while the meeting between the Teeneks and myself was clearly an encounter between cultural " others, " I found it difficult to pinpoint what specifically made these people and their place " ethnic. " When I finally settled in the Teenek hamlet of Loma Larga( 203 inhabitants in 1993) and got progressively familiar with its residents, I asked Dionisio, the local healer--in his seventies at that time--about this peculiar common reaction observed in several Teenek localities. His answer, which also shocked me, later turned out to be pivotal to the understanding of the Teenek collective identity construction around historical events and spatial configurations : Before, we were conquered by the Spaniards, we were poor people. The Huastecs(n3) lived naked, they were not baptized when Christopher Columbus and Hernn Corts came, they were not eating well, they lived on roots. They knew nothing, their food was not cooked. The Spaniards brought teaching, they taught the poor people. The Huastecs had no houses, they lived @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and people in the city of Mexico. Here there was nothing, no houses, no little villages ; they lived naked, in caves, under rocks, in ditches. The Spaniards taught them to talk, they baptized them, they taught them how to eat. That is how it happened, that is how the village came to be. They united everybody with them. People who did not want to join with those from outside remained like we are, outside. They did not want to live near the road. They did not want to go with the Mestizos. They do n't understand, do n't know how to talk, they are afraid of being killed. During the Revolution, many people were killed, that is the reason they are afraid. Here the Mestizos did not come. Here people close the doors, they do n't answer, they hide in the brush, for fear of being killed. It is the custom of the ancestors. Now we 've hardly given up @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ half-wild here( quoted in Ariel de Vidas 2004 : 295-296). In this " poetics of history "( Comaroff and Comaroff 1987) I found out all the primary ingredients that would constitute my future analysis( Ariel de Vidas 2004). Indeed, this kind of discourse with its significant oppositions, which clearly distinguishes between " us " and " them, " helped the Teenek to justify their relegation to the fringes of modern life and indicated a vision of a concrete, inexorable social, economic, and political situation that was reformulated in the local Teenek system of representation. Later on, moving around Teenek villages and their undomesticated adjoining spaces, several Teeneks shared with me some of their subtle cultural readings of those spaces related, as will be shown, to this kind of historical discourse.( n4) In this paper, I will present some examples of these poetical narratives on social configurations to show how the expressed consciousness of inequality which they inform, shaped by extra-communal historical forces, do not merge into @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ spatial partition. Already, in the aforementioned testimony, we can see a specific historical construction ; based on a cultural idiom as well as self-denigration combined with scholarly knowledge( although Columbus never went to Mexican lands) that shows us a social consciousness of the Teeneks ' subordination to the Mestizo ruling group. Indeed, the Teeneks ' identification with their ancestors( human and pre-human as will be shown ahead) to explain their own modern-day marginalization and poverty seems to reveal a sense of inferiority and a blind veneration for the Spaniards and their offspring. From this testimony, it would appear as though nothing existed before the arrival of the Spaniards, and that Teenek society existed then only in its primitive phase. Yet the absence of Teenek accounts of the pre-Hispanic period, of the development of Huaxtec civilization( which lasted from 200 AD to the Spanish conquest in 1522), may be attributed not only to a lack of available historical documents but also to a cultural construction. In fact, contemporary Teeneks may be affirming @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the modern nation-state) from that of their ancestors--acknowledging in that way missionaries ' disparagement of their Pre-Hispanic culture and society as well as posterior clerical and institutional approaches towards indigenous populations(n5)--thereby distinguishing themselves from the latter without denying a certain bond of kinship with them( cf. Slaney 1997). As will be shown, that kinship, virtually practiced in healing rituals held in the bush, constitutes a cornerstone of their identity, becoming by the same token their first alterity. Thus, this paper is about how the formal and symbolic aspects of Teenek-Mestizo social relations, shaped by historical processes, are expressed spatially, thus constructing ethnic distinctions in a Teenek cultural **25;2291;TOOLONG Content Versus Boundary? Before proceeding, it is necessary to explicate the use of the term " ethnicity " in this paper as it is too often applied to any sort of consciousness of collective identity, in almost any kind of community within a pluralistic society : as race( Wallman 1978), culture( Agyeman and Spooner 1997), national origin( Thrift 1996 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ broadly speaking, as any kind of sectarianism.( n6) The polysemic use of that term demonstrates its usefulness, but at the same time, it blurs the precise meaning of each of the above-mentioned concrete social situations. I am following Weber, who was probably the first to use the term " ethnic identity " as far back as the 1920s, and according to whom some minority groups, migrant communities or neighborhoods can not be described as " ethnic. " Unlike other forms of collective identity, as Weber points out, ethnic identity is based essentially on the subjective belief in a shared blood relationship.( n7) The common descent assumed by an ethnic group implies the development of a collective history, invented or experienced, which, by invoking some seminal event, molds the group and validates the sense of belonging to it( Weber 1968 : 385-398). Weber 's definition underlines the subjective belief in a shared relationship as a way of marking contrasting identities and may be considered " ' primordial ' in the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of social existence "( Comaroff and Comaroff 1992 : 54). But this approach, as I understand it, does not emphasize the substance, but rather the idea of the reproduction of the group 's consciousness of a shared origin, which accounts for the group 's distinctiveness relative to social Others that is, in itself, embedded--and accordingly also persistently transformed--in an historical context. Furthermore, ethnicity, as Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff argue, is both an analytic object and a conceptual subject, which stems from a specific historical configuration that is " simultaneously structural and cultural "( 1992 : 50). However, in the wake of the constructivist approach to ethnicity launched by Barth 's seminal text( 1969), the research on ethnicity has focused mainly on the processes and mechanisms of the construction of collective identity and thus tended to accentuate external parameters at the expense of internal consciousness. This approach weakened the ethnographic contribution of cultural specificity in favor of an all-encompassing and almost mechanical dialectic based on the identity-alterity dichotomy @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Thus I also follow Levine 's suggestion that ethnicity stems above all from a cognitive method of classification of human beings( Levine 1999). This kind of classification, although based on cultural particularities, emanates from wider socio-political processes, mainly " the asymmetric incorporation of structurally dissimilar groupings into a single political economy "( Comaroff and Comaroff 1992 : 54). In order to understand a given ethnicity, it is thus crucial to examine the reciprocal relations between the external processes and ethnogenesis. Moreover, ethnicity can be viewed less as circumscribing a unified entity than as a given group 's reflection on social boundaries, as manifested in its daily practices. The radical separation between " us " and " them " can hence be nuanced in favor of a more fluid notion of Otherness influenced by cultural, social, and economic interconnections marked by relations of inequality( Gupta and Ferguson 1992 : 14). Narrowing the use of the term " ethnicity " in this manner to a fourth-world group, that is, an @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it is now embedded, allows us to grasp the cultural enterprise of the group 's members in the marking of its relationships with the Otherness within the framework of globalizing social processes. Thus, when Teenek people asked me about my chabal( land, country), what emerged from the comparison was their own view of Teenek chabal. Indeed, the group 's territory with its formal and symbolic boundaries, as a space fashioned from intra- and interactive systems, offers an accurate place to analyze how the group 's members reproduce classificatory differences permanently between them and cultural others. Therefore, in order to understand what created those invisible boundaries I crossed while walking among the Teenek villages, or, in other words, how the collective identity of a community of people becomes ethnic, we need to investigate how global forms are locally and culturally mediated by the relations between a communal space, the people who dwell in it, and those who do not.The Setting Wide economic and social disparities, originating in the colonial period, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a lush cattle-rearing region in the humid tropics of Mexico 's northeast, has been a site of colonization since the arrival of the Spaniards in the sixteenth century. The region became an arena for the classic antagonism between farmers and cattlemen. In this particular case, the conflict began with the despoiling of indigenous land by Spanish colonists and later by the latter 's descendants and rich Mestizos. The appropriation of native lands for pasture continues to this day through diverse plunderous mechanisms, sometimes violent in nature, which for many Teenek people I know is crystallized in the depiction of mestizo ranchers as abusive( Ariel de Vidas 1994a ; 2004). Consequently, since the beginning of the colonial era the Indians have struggled to recover their lands. This agrarian history is now carved in the landscape. The white and mestizo ranchers carry on their cattle rearing activities in large, flat properties, while the Teenek peasants live and work interspersed among them in fragmented and hilly plots, where they grow subsistence crops such as corn and beans @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ cultivable land is scarce. In Loma Larga, for example, each of the 38 families that constituted this hamlet during my stay there had an average of 4 acres of pluvial land located on sloping hills. Thus, the consequent exhaustion of their plots together with the demographic growth of recent decades have forced the Teeneks out of their villages in search of daily or seasonal work in the region. These jobs in the larger society have put the Teeneks in permanent contact with the non-Indian population, which exploits them and inevitably makes them aware of their marginal condition( Ariel de Vidas 2002a). Present-day Teenek villages are scattered around the mestizo town of Tantoyuca. Most of them are located two to three hours by foot from Tantoyuca( there was no regular transportation at the time of my stay). But far from being insulated from the national society, these villages serve as sites for a social and cultural organization that regulates interactions with the dominant group and draws boundaries between the Mestizos and the Teeneks. As will @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ inside the village space in accordance with local Teenek cosmology. The dozen or so kilometers separating most of the Teenek villages from the Tantoyuca mestizo urban, administrative, commercial, religious, and political center( cabecera municipal) --approximate population of 25,000--span a gulf of mutual ignorance about these two worlds, which are linked and interdependent yet completely distinct. This claim by no means supports Wolf 's idea of the " closed corporate community, " a homogeneous and self-sufficient indigenous society endowed with economic leveling mechanisms based on a civil-religious hierarchy( Wolf 1955).( n8) The Teenek who are scattered around the principal-town in administratively dependant villages( comunidades) are deeply tied to Tantoyuca and other state and national urban centers for trade, bureaucratic, and political purposes, as well as for the sale of their labor.( n9) However, broadly speaking, although Teenek people are mostly bilingual, they have no relations of sociability with the Mestizo town 's inhabitants with whom they maintain a social distance and perfunctory relations. The members @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ own set of representations of the other human group that lives so near, yet is so remote. Consequently, the Veracruz Teeneks live both in constant contact with and cut off from mestizo society. Teenek life is articulated around a fundamental social division that, in the terms of the local regional language, separates " the town people "( gente de la ciudad) from the " people of the communities "( gente de las comunidades).( n10) This division forges the modes of representation that are shared in practice by the social actors on both sides of the divide. These representations are evident in the terms the groups use for one another on a daily basis. The Teeneks refer to the Mestizos as " the Spaniards, " " the gente de razn "( literally, " people of reason "), " the cattlemen, " " the people with cars, " " the rich, " whereas the Mestizos of Tantoyuca call the Teenek " the Indians, " " the inditos, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, " the natives, " " the gente sin razn "( " people without reason "), " the kwitol "( " children " in Teenek), and, at best, " the people of humble origin. " Furthermore, centuries of racist and oppressive relations towards Teenek populations were interiorized by local Teeneks who seldom overtly express particularly self-denigrating discourses, such as " we are less than nothing, " " stinking, " " dirty Indians, " " ugly idiots, " " cowards, " etc.( Ariel de Vidas 2002a). The Social Boundaries ' Approach This dichotomy--lived and perceived on a daily basis by all the social actors as a cultural clash, even if it is superimposed on other kinds of distinctions, be they social, economic, or territorial--ultimately supports the Teenek perception of their identity as an opposition between themselves and Others( mainly the Mestizos). The boundary thus created, as Barth( 1969) points out, is a means of defining the ethnic group and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, itself, remains variable. According to Barth, ethnicity, far from been primordial, is in fact a form of social organization, stemming from an interactional situatedness and based on the demarcation of groups according to their ascribed origin. The differentiating diacritical marks established by each group then confirm the nature of the group 's social interaction. Barth 's approach, according to which social borders express social differentiation, disentangled ethnicity from culture and focused on the political economy of ethnicity to which " culture would be entirely epiphenomenal "( Verdery 1994 : 41).( n11) However, if ethnicity is no longer a shared culture, but rather culture as politics, it is necessary " to problematize the cultural side of ethnic identities instead of taking it for granted "( Verdery 1994 : 41, emphases in original). In this vein and in order to understand Teenek ethnicity, we may analyze the regional historical and social processes that separate this group from others, the discourses concerning the boundaries thus created, as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @( Ariel de Vidas 2004). These processes are reinforced by Teenek differentiation marked by some external cultural and structural traits such as their language and their territoriality. However, although ascription and self-ascription do certainly reflect a collective identity, they do not necessary reflect an ethnic one. As Jenkins points out, it is important to distinguish " between two analytically distinct processes of ascription : group identification and social categorization. The first occurs inside the ethnic boundary, the second outside and across it "( Jenkins 1997 : 23, emphases in original). Indeed, although Teenek differentiation( and marginalization) from national society could be explained globally by social stratification based on inequality rather than on cultural difference--analyzing historical, social, and political processes in order to understand the formation of ethnic boundaries allows us to plumb their origins and rationales, but it does not necessarily inform us about the indigenous view of these processes and about the resulting ethnic distinctions as they perceive them( Ariel de Vidas 1994c). In other words, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ understand the group 's presence and its principles of differentiation, but they indicate only its persistence, not its ethnogenesis. It is in the fusion of both of these aspects, the internal group identification and the external social categorization, that ethnicity resides( Comaroff and Comaroff 1992 : 52) and this will be the perspective adopted in this paper.The Spatio-Cultural Approach Thus, the specificity of an ethnic group can not be taken as a postulate based solely on boundaries affirmed by each side. It is also necessary to explore a particular group 's own representation of identity and alterity and internal elaboration concerning its cultural difference. Stressing the structure of meaning( Anderson 1991 ; Cohen 1985) given to the " us " and " them, " can explain how the sense of differentiation and similarity is locally elaborated and transmitted. Hence, Cohen explicitly converges with Barth 's approach, although from another standpoint. " Ethnicity has definite appearance, but rather indefinite substance " not unsubstantial( Cohen 1994 : 62). Barth( 1994 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ well that. The issue of cultural content versus boundary, as it was formulated, unintentionally served to mislead. Yes, it is a question of analyzing boundary processes, not of enumerating the sum of content(.). But locating the bases of such boundary processes is not a question of pacing the limits of a group and observing its markers and the shedding of members.(.) Central and culturally valued institutions and activities in an ethnic group may be deeply involved in its boundary maintenance by setting internal processes of convergence into motion( Barth 1994 : 17-18). In this vein, groups ' consciousness of historical processes are seldom privileged in attempts to understand a group 's ethnicity( inter alia : Comaroff and Comaroff 1992 ; Farriss 1984 ; Gruzinski 1988), often bypassing its spatial aspects themselves permeated by history( cf. Halbwachs 1968). As Foucault put it Space was treated as the dead, the fixed, the undialectical, the immobile. Time, on the other hand, was richness @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ spatial terms seems to have the air of anti-history. If one started to talk in terms of space that meant that one was hostile to time. It meant, as the fools say, that one " denied history.. " They did not understand that these spatial terms.meant the throwing into relief of processes--historical ones, needless to say--of power( Foucault 1980 : 149 quoted by Agnew and Duncan 1989 : 1). Indeed, the inner organization of space is a good place to start for problematizing the cultural side of ethnic identities, as boundaries should be recognized " as matters of consciousness rather than of institutional dictation "( Cohen 1994 : 69 ; cf. Kuper 1972 ; Pellow 1996). The sense of difference and distinctiveness may reside simultaneously( although differently) in the structure and in the minds of the people who express them. Thus, marking the ethnic space, the boundaries of an indigenous group also mark the edge of " two social systems of activity, of organization, or of meaning "( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ enjoins us to consider any social space as composed of an organized set of external and internal social interactions. Thus, in order to understand Teenek ethnicity we must first ask if they use a concept of boundaries at all to think about their territoriality, social groups, and categorical distinctions( Barth 2000). Following Vermeulen and Govers 's formulation( 1994 : 4), we may analyze Teenek ethnicity as an element of social organization that implies regulated interaction and as an element of culture that entails consciousness of difference. Teenek ethnic space should then be reconstituted not as a putative concept, but as a cognitive one, with an emphasis on the people 's own experience of boundaries and their perception of them. Thus, ethnicity is explored in this article using a model of ethnic Self and Otherness, as defined by the ethnic group itself through its own perception of its spatial organization. This approach is by no means a return to a sort of essentialism in order to explain the ethnic configuration, but it takes @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and elaboration of the differences between " us " and " them ") in order to understand the mechanisms involved in elaborating ethnic identity( cf. Fischer 1999 ; Gil-White 2001 ; Watanabe and Fischer 2004). Following this approach, I do not exclude a constructivist or inter-actional analysis of distinct external parameters in order to understand the elaboration of a specific ethnic identity, but I do emphasize the way in which an ethnic group re-elaborates or re-semanticizes its specific social configuration according to its own cultural logic and on the basis of its own autochthonous heritage. The symbolic construction of boundaries, as will be shown, encompasses the social interactions with cultural others and denotes an historical consciousness. In the following section, I analyze how the Teeneks with whom I have been in contact in the hamlet of Loma Larga think about their cultural distinctiveness and similarities, and how they experience it within their communal space.The Social Categorization of Teenek Ethnic Space The Teenek ethno-theoretical model of " us " and " them " might not be readily apparent. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ outside only by the formulated boundary and several cultural markers such as the Teenek language, while its substance is confined to the experience and consciousness locked inside group intimacy. Analyzing the inner meaning of Teenek boundaries helps us understand how the Teeneks manage their space in order to make it ethnic.The Formal Boundaries The Teeneks of the municipio of Tantoyuca essentially live in the framework of dispersed villages where land is owned collectively by their members but is cultivated in separate plots. Contrary to the indigenous municipios of Guatemala described by Tax( 1937 ; 1941), the fifteen Teenek villages( comunidades) are not independent political and social units. Along with another fifteen Nahua and mestizo villages, they belong to Tantoyuca county, and are all administratively and politically dependent on the mestizo county seat of Tantoyuca. The Teenek hamlets, scattered through their villages ' territories do not have formal boundaries. The delimited individual plots might be located far from one 's hamlet but are always within one 's village boundaries, which serve as the primary collective identification @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ its different scattered villages, shares similar heritage and history, language, patterns of subsistence, settlement, and social organization. However, they are not of pre-Hispanic, or even colonial, origin. They are the result of a constituted community land legacy--following the liberal law( 1856) that ordered the dismemberment of corporate properties, but permitted indigenous peasants to collectively purchase( condueazgos) hacienda lands they had cultivated as peons and on which they had lived( Ariel de Vidas 1994b ; Escobar Ohmstede 1993). The demographic growth in the original centers of these communities that occurred in the nineteenth century led to the progressive formation of new adjoining hamlets. This process resulted in the exploitation of all communal territory. It was no doubt parallel to this growing of the population on an increasingly restricted territory that the formalization of rights of access to those communities was established. The lands of the nineteenth century Teenek condueazgos and, subsequently, the contemporary Teenek lands are community properties that can not be transferred except between members of each @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their descendants. These people can therefore not use and dispose of these lands as they wish. For example, in these Veracruzan Teenek villages land bequests are exclusively patrilineal. Thus, as the rules of virilocality apply, an outsider man, married to a local woman, even if he is a Teenek from another village, wo n't be allowed to move in into his spouse 's hamlet. This regulation does not pertain to a group of small private properties owned by each of the members of the community to which access is free to all, but to possession of community lands founded on certain rights and obligations. Therefore, when indivisible private property belongs to several individuals, there is a superposition of public and private laws. In addition, for its indigenous co-proprietors this collective patrimony represents not only their principal means of subsistence( even if it is not the only one), but also the place where their cultural specificity is expressed completely freely( language, traditions, common law.). The community @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ which in this case is also a cultural identity. In order to preserve this collective and identitary patrimony the co-proprietors have defined the criteria for belonging to their territorial community on exclusive bases that link the right of the person to the right to the land. The criteria of belonging to the community thus unfold over two axes : one, vertical, involving genealogical relationships ; the other, horizontal, involving social relations. The principle of descent is thus strictly superimposed on the right of access to the community patrimony, which then exhibits an extra-familial dimension. An individual 's descent is not enough to inherit the familial patrimony, since that patrimony is not a true one ; it is rather a matter of a right of use. In order to be able to take advantage of a right of access to the community patrimony, the heir( on the level of the familial unit) must thus also have a social relationship with the community, that is, fulfill a series of obligations toward the community( participation in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ offices). In this context inheriting property to offspring therefore also implies the transmission of a community member 's social status that must be assumed and assured in order to take advantage of the patrimony. Since the land of the community is not private property, it can not be transferred to people outside the community. Right of access to the land is thus conditioned by two sets of superimposed rules, those of patrilineal descent and those of residence.Teenek Notion of Community The term " community "( comunidad) has a number of connotations in this region. According to the Mexican laws of the Agrarian Reform, it is a legal agrarian structure( bienes comunales) originating in the nineteenth century haciendas.( n12) It also refers to a municipal subdivision, sometimes called a " congregation "( congregacin). Finally, as a Teenek concept--kwentsal--it describes the immediate social framework of the Teeneks with its internal division into hamlets. This Teenek term, which is used both for the hamlet and the whole village( the sum of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ entity of the social group to which people feel they belong. Indeed, the relation between kinship and territoriality, which defines membership in the Teenek community is also expressed linguistically. The term " household " does not exist in Teenek. To describe someone as a " relative, " informants used the Teenek words exlowaal, kidhtal, and ja'uub, which indistinctly express( according to them) " an acquaintance, someone close, a relative, a neighbor, a friend. " Although I explained to my interlocutors the semantic difference that exists between these terms, that differentiation apparently does not exist in Teenek. Antonyms of those words, given by the same people, without other commentaries express their meaning better : yab xata u ujna = " he is nothing of me, " " I am not used to him ; " owel toneltsik = " a passerby who comes from far away ; " owel belaltsik = " those who have walked from far away ; " k'e'et'tsik ja'ts = " they are others, not @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is not someone known "( thus an unknown). The term kidhtal( " close, " " relative, " " an acquaintance ".) applies only to Teenek people, and kidhtalich is no doubt the term that is closest to our concept of family. The root kidh which is a Veracruzan dialectalism and which constitutes part of the word kidhaab = " brother " or " sister, " is added to the morpheme no to make the word kidhno = " vigil "( among brothers, relatives, friends, acquaintances, neighbors), or to the word laab, which results in kidhlaab = " joy, " " happiness "( to be together?). As for the term ja'uub, according to the dictionary of Tapia Zenteno( 1985) for the seventeenth century Teenek from the San Luis Potos region, it also signifies " lineage " or " descent. " Hence, the term ja'uub that originally denoted only blood ties is currently used in Loma Larga to designate those of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and those of the land are tightly connected. The members of nearby Teenek hamlets are indeed intermarried and linked by bonds of kinship. The absence of a specific term to designate those who live under the same roof and the existence of terms that are applied to all of the local Teeneks might reflect the concept of the group as a vast kindred, a notion reinforced by local endogamy. It is this notion that provides the strongest support for the collective identity and forms the basis for social inclusion or exclusion( Ariel de Vidas 1993 ; 2005). The Teeneks live as a socially and politically recognized group with definite territorial and historical boundaries. The various Teenek authorities, internally elected, can rule according to common law on cases within the villages and preserve the Teeneks ' exclusive rights to attain their communal property( Ariel de Vidas 2004). By governing social life within the villages and in all of the hamlets that form a congregation( or an agrarian community), the Teenek authorities are the first to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ members of their communities. These community institutions are not necessarily ethnic institutions in the sense that their functions alone mark the borders between Teenek society and that of the Mestizos. But that is one of their major aspects, one that is perceived in particular by the filtering they exercise vis--vis the municipal and national institutions( deciding, for example, which cases will be treated locally and which ones will be bought to outside, mestizo oriented, juridical instances). Responsible for overseeing the common traditions and the communal lands, they thus reinforce the Teeneks ' internal social relations at the expense of their relationship to the outside world, and by extension, the feeling of ethnic identity in the face of the ejek world that surrounds them. The formal ethnic aspect of the Teenek-ejek dichotomy is reflected in the way in which the Teeneks entrench themselves in their communities, the filters that their authorities put up between the Mestizo and Teenek worlds, their practice of local endogamy, and the various devices they employ to preserve their collective @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ spoken, where certain specific customs are still practiced, where people from outside the community, especially Mestizos, are excluded by various means, and where mechanisms of incorporation imply the actual presence of the community 's inhabitants, thus becomes, for the latter, a place that offers emotional attachment and refuge from a rather hostile external world( Ariel de Vidas 2004). Membership in the ethnic group then appears as an effective way of defending advantages( land, relative autonomy, customary law, etc.) and of overcoming disadvantages( social and economic) through solidarity and shared circumstances. In such cases of continuous interaction between separate cultural groups, ethnicity, as Glazer and Moynihan( 1975 : 15-16) suggested long ago, seems to emerge as a counter to the definitive and deterministic characteristics of social stratification that arise out of the particular histories of each group. These markers are formal, but the relationships between the Teenek community 's members are not only based on an arbitrary spatial proximity or social cohesion. As will @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ shared with me by the Teenek people with whom I worked, forms the symbolic basis for their ethnic identity.The Group Identification with the Ethnic Space Before analyzing the ethnic organization of Teenek space, let us bear in mind that the Spanish conquerors who intruded into Mexican lands in the sixteenth century dramatically changed the local social and cultural landscape. Beyond the drastic demographic decline of the indigenous populations that followed the conquest( about 90 per cent), one of its most important aspects, from a socio-cultural perspective, was the conversion to Christianity of those populations whose religions until then had been polytheistic. Today the post-colonial social configuration and the legacies from the Spanish period are deeply embedded in the daily life of Indigenous societies. Still, the memory of the autochthonous past and of ancient beliefs, which was concealed( and thus transformed) after the arrival of the missionaries, permeate contemporary indigenous interpretations of the interethnic relations and they are often manifest in the intimate spheres of the indigenous societies such as internal rituals or alluded discourses.( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, one of the formal requirements for full-fledged membership in the community is direct patrilineal descent. Moreover, as predicated by Weber( 1968), the ethnic aspect of a collective identity is reinforced by a presumed common founding history of the forebears. Indeed, a myth widely known and often referred to by the Teenek villagers I knew, explains, in their own terms, the social, economic, and ontological boundaries that separate them from other groups and ultimately organizes their symbolic internal space as an ethnic and autochthonous one.The Teenek Myth of Origin Everything began when the sun appeared. Before that, the earth was flat and the Baatsik ' who were the pre-human ancestors, lived in the pre-solar darkness. They did not want to receive the sun, believing that destruction would come with it, so they decided to prevent its arrival. In order to obstruct the sun, they buried themselves head first in the earth that was still soft, thereby creating the hills. However, this attempt to obscure the light of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the subterranean shadows, angry with the other inhabitants of the earth who did not fight against the sun. The Baatsik ' are still enraged to this day with the descendants of those who accepted the sun and soil and trample on their ancient territory. At the beginning of this new solar era,( n14) the Baatsik ' resented the new configuration of the universe into two worlds, one subterranean and the other above ground, and they began to kidnap people and animals such as donkeys, cows, horses, chickens, and pigs from the upper world, imprisoning them in the infra-terrestrial world. This situation finally ended when a certain Marcos liberated all the prisoners and locked up the place where they had been held. From that moment on, the chthonic beings could no longer steal material things, only spiritual ones--namely the souls of the Teeneks. Hence, these telluric ancestors appear in the lives of the contemporary Teeneks in the form of whirlwinds or visions, afflicting them and causing the loss of a part @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the soul. " This is a radical synthesis of the Veracruzan Teeneks ' myth of origin, which was conveyed to me in distinct versions( in Teenek and Spanish) by different people in several Teenek villages especially in the context of healing rituals. Elsewhere, declining this myth( and other related tales) in various socio-cultural contexts with their associated Teenek exegesis, I showed that among the Teeneks this myth sustains a belief system that encompasses the local religion, mythology, historical and social ideologies, all related to their ethnic identity( Ariel de Vidas 2004). As will be demonstrated here, this system is also closely related to a particular symbolic perception of the space to which the Teeneks attribute temporal dimensions of distinct orders. These temporal dimensions are reflected in various aspects of Teenek daily life that will be analyzed after delineating the main characteristics of the space proper to the Baatsik. ' The Space of the Ancestors The Baatsik '( baats=twisted ; ik ' =wind, meaning " whirlwinds ") belong to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. My Teenek interlocutors described the world of the Baatsik ' as a place where everything obeys a logic that is inverse to theirs. In this world of darkness, where the left side is dominant, the beings walk backwards. Moreover, the Baatsik ' cherish everything that human beings find despicable, such as rotten, dirty, foul-smelling, and tasteless food. The Baatsik ' are merciless and are associated with all that is considered vile, immoral and unchristian. Today, these beings inhabit the wild space, the alte '( literally, " in " or " under the woods "). Encounters with the Baatsik ' are inevitable and generally occur on the paths, near wells, or in gullies, hollow trees, or caves. The Baatsik ' are found in particular in places where the earth 's crust is uneven, which is to say in the hills and ditches that they themselves created by burying their heads in the ground. In other words, they are found in any cavity, crevice @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @( cf. Tousignant 1979 : 356). These spots are called dhakil in Teenek, which means, according to my informants, a white place( dhak = " white "), colorless, insipid, as favored by the Baatsik '. Among the ancient Mayas( in whose linguistic family the Teeneks belong(n15), the color white was associated with the North, the direction from which invasions and evil came, and also with corn( their principal food) and with some chthonic spirits( Gonzlez Torres 1991 : 126). Similarly, the Tzotzils( Mayas) from San Juan Chamula in Chiapas State in the Mexican South associate white( sak) with the sun 's irradiation( Gossen 1992 : 224). Although not stated directly by Teenek informants, we might infer that the term dhakil evokes these ancient representations for them, linked as they are to an earlier age, the sun, the earth 's spirits, and basic sustenance. In any case, in daily life, the Teeneks are very attentive @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their creation story( just recall the first narrative in this paper where it is told that " before, " Teenek people lived " in caves, under rocks " eating uncooked food.). As will be shown, the Teeneks associate the space of the Baatsik ', localized in the dhakil, to their autochthonous past and by extension, to their postcolonial interethnic social configuration. Regarding the figure of Marcos, the mythical hero who saved the people by locking up the Baatsik ' in their chthonian condition,( n16) he may represent, in the Teenek syncretic religion, the apostle Mark, author of the second synoptic gospel. Indeed, this text was written precisely for the converted of the pagan world in the Roman Empire. According to the canonic representation of this evangelist, Saint Mark appears in popular Mexican iconography( popularized through holy images and calendars), writing in a large book near the entrance to a cave with an ailing cat by his side. Let us recall that, according to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ often take the form of a terrifying cat. Although Marcos saved the people and animals( of European origin) who had been captured by the Baatsik ' and locked up their universe, he did not destroy these chthonic beings. He simply confined them to their telluric realm from which they could steal only the Teeneks ' souls. From that point on the two worlds, pagan and Christian, were delimited and incompatible. Marcos ' deed as related in the myth could thus be perceived as the act that defined the present-day separation of cultural domains between the Catholic faith( on the surface of the earth) and the ancient religion( below the surface of the earth). As the Comaroffs stressed, peoples caught up in processes of radical change seldom use suggestive oppositions to come to terms with their history. However, as will be shown, " making sense of the whole process is mediated.by an existing set of cultural categories "( Comaroff and Comaroff 1987 : 194). This founding myth holds that the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Teenek interlocutors, corresponds to the arrival of Christianity,( n17) created a fundamental distinction between the space of the ancestors who rejected the new faith brought by the " light " and the space of the present-day Teeneks, who accepted it.( n18) In this manner, an initial pair of opposite terms was constituted, in which the " we " of the present was contrasted to the " them " of the past. One must show these " others " respect if one does not want to be subjected to their fury and cause social imbalance. In this way the Teeneks established an entire system of space partitioning themselves from the Baatsik ', and subsequently creating a distinction between the mythified autochthonous world and the world that thereafter had to be shared with the **25;2318;TOOLONG presence. Broadly speaking, this system separates the communal space between the domestic, Christian space of the present and the wild, pagan space of the past. This organization of the space is evident in various realms, such as those pertaining @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and birth rituals. Taken together, as will be demonstrated, these distinctions reflect a classificatory system of ethnic difference.The Musical Spaces Without describing here in detail the different dances and musical compositions that constitute the Teenek cultural heritage( see Ariel de Vidas 2004), it is possible to observe a very clear spatial distinction that applies to the dances and to the types of musical instruments that accompany them. The Veracruzan Teeneks practice six dances. Three of them seem to be of ancient origin( the reed dance--bixom pakaab, the sparrow hawk dance--bixom t'iiw, and the tiger cat dance--bixom padhum) by virtue of the fact that they are accompanied by instruments such as the bamboo flute, the square frame drum and/or shell rattles. Three other dances are accompanied by a violin and a guitar and therefore seem of European origin or are mutations of ancient dances( the young girls ' dance --bixom tsidhan, the mirror dance--bixom lam, and the black men 's dance--bixom ejek). Furthermore, many variants of these dances are found throughout @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, Tepehua and Otomi Indians, a fact that reinforces a fortiori their " imported " nature. These distinctions are not arbitrary ones that I have created, as if I were concealing cultural syncretism. This classification is established by the Teenek dancers themselves who distinguish these dances according to their relation to the Catholic faith or to pagan beliefs and who apply this distinction spatially. Thus, the dances that are considered " foreign " may be executed inside the churches or chapels, while the dances that are considered " ours " and maintain a certain implicit relation with some divinities or rituals of the autochthonous past are not generally performed within Christian sanctuaries. The relation between the space and the autochthonous musical patrimony manifests itself also by the fact that the Baatsik ', according to local beliefs, refuse to hear the music emanating from stringed instruments, such as the violin and the guitar. As we know, these specific instruments were introduced by the Spaniards, and they accompany the three dances designated as " foreign. " Moreover @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ as mountains, caves, and huge trees, all considered dhakil, the sites where one may encounter beings of the autochthonous past, some Teeneks told me that one can hear festive music played on drums and flutes. As noted previously these are the musical instruments of the three ancient dances that still exist today in this region : the dances of the reed, the sparrow hawk, and the tiger cat. It is important to mention that none of the informants has ever indicated hearing the musical instruments of the other dances practiced in the region, such as the violin and the guitar, that were introduced by the Spaniards. Dance and music were thus distinguished by their origin. By the meaning given to them, they contribute to the distinctions on the ground and to the differentiation between contemporary, Christian time and space and that of pagan antiquity.The Corporal Spaces This spatial and temporal partitioning also applies to an essential distinction made in the human body and particularly manifested through the type of illnesses from which the Teeneks may @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with the dhakil--avoiding them, for example, at noon and after dark, which are the Baatsik ' favorite hours for pouring liquor( aguardiente) as an offering when passing by them--those places that always remind them of the pre-human ancestors and therefore of their origins and the history of their contemporary social and spatial configuration. Teenek are conscious of occupying a territory that is not theirs, and they know that encounters with these permanently malevolent beings are inevitable. It is indeed this kind of encounter that is at the root of the illnesses of the soul. Illnesses of the soul result from a disturbance of a being 's vital force. According to Teenek nosology, these illnesses are unlike diseases of the body, which are due to a physical abnormality. The diseases in which a bodily malfunction is evident are treated with medicinal herbs, infusions, and, if necessary, after consultation with a biomedical doctor in town. These diseases are considered similar to those from which the Mestizos suffer, and in order to be cured @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ non-Indian neighbors. These are diseases of the present. Illnesses of the soul are altogether different. According to their own exegesis, only the Teeneks can suffer from a disease of the soul, which results from the capture of part of a being 's vital force by the Baatsik ', the ancestors of the autochthonous past. These diseases are cured by particular therapeutic rites, performed by Teenek healers only, that can liberate the soul from its captivity. Whenever contemporary Teeneks behave in a way judged excessive with respect to the Baatsik '( for example, if they trespass on their territory or hunt forbidden animals) or to the members of their community( if they differentiated themselves from the others, thereby provoking envy--see Ariel de Vidas 2007), these beings of the underworld appear in the lives of the Teeneks in the form of " winds, " visions of ferocious animals or ghosts that provoke sudden fright( jik'ltalaab), known in Spanish as espanto, or in some places susto. Such fear causes a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ victims of some of their internal heat, that is, part of their animating force, and leading to the " illness of the soul. " The jik'eenib or espanto is manifested by a lack of appetite, dizziness, anxiety, listlessness, inability to concentrate, fainting, and other symptoms of loss of balance. All cases reflect a state of weakness and vulnerability related to the loss of vital forces.( n19) To recover these vital forces, it is necessary to find out where they were lost( since the effects of espanto are not always immediate), and to this end different kinds of therapeutic cleansings( peedhox, commonly called limpias in Spanish) and divinations are carried out. The divination rituals detect the dhakil where the soul of the patient is kept captive. This procedure implies a certain familiarity with the wild space. Once the origin of the ailment has been discovered, the Baatsik ' must be appeased in their own territory through invocations and offerings. The invocations are made exclusively in Teenek @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ example of the reinforcement of ethnic identity through language which permits exclusive communication with the ancestors). The rite also includes the placement, solely with the left hand, of special food offerings at the foot of certain trees, food that is tasty to telluric beings but repugnant to human beings. Let us recall that the Baatsik ' cherish refuse, spittle, foul-smelling, dirty, raw, rotten, or tasteless food, chicken heads, egg shells, bones, carrion, and especially liquor--mixed with saliva. In exchange, the Baatsik ' return the captive spiritual force to the Teeneks and the symbolic equilibrium between humans and supernatural beings is restored. This transposition of the patient( or his/her representative) into the wild space opposes the human realm in order to heal his or her soul, and links the individual with his or her autochthonous past, with the group 's history, and hence with his or her collective identity. The illness of the soul, through the spatial transposition, enhances the relation between the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, the return of the liberated soul to the domestic space reinserts the patient into the space of the present, ruled by Catholic divinities, and connects him or her with the extra-ethnic social body.The Domestic Space After the healer has redeemed the captive soul in the wild space, he replaces it in the body inside the individual 's home. This ceremony is performed in front of the altar where the images of the Catholic saints are placed, icons to whom one prays only in Spanish. The house and its adjacent yard are considered spaces where the Baatsik 's influence is thwarted by the power of the saints. The Teenek myth of the healers ' origin( Ariel de Vidas 2004 : 175-177) mentions that the " illness " can not find a man who hides in his own house. Healers always care for their patients in their own domicile because one can be cured only in his or her home. In the healing practices, one can see clearly how the space of the different divinities is negotiated. The @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ socio-cultural life, and they constitute spaces that were subtracted from the anti-social Baatsik 's territory. The boundaries between the different spaces are permanently maintained through distinct practices. For example, in the not so distant past, when people finished building a house, they invoked a benediction that consecrated it as a Catholic home. Moreover, it was necessary to renew this ceremony once every ten years as, according to my informants, the blessing " vanished " as time went on. A vigil was organized, preceded by a procession of dancers performing the reed dance( bixum pakaab) --considered autochthonous--and accompanied by images of the Catholic saints taken from the hamlet 's chapel. Meanwhile, the home owner lit incense made from copal and sprinkled holy water on the house 's four corners and the yard, starting with the right corner( these activities are all related to the social space). The vigil lasted all night, alternating the recitation of the rosary with the sprinkling of holy water and the use of incense on the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, after resting the saints ' images inside the house, the dancers were not allowed inside. Periodically, the homeowner went outside the house to pour a libation of liquor on the ground, offering it also to the dancers. My informants explained this detail by stating that " the saint we have inside the house does not rule everywhere, only where we live " i.e. the domestic space. From these descriptions, we can infer that this was a ceremony whose intention was to delimit the territory ruled by the Baatsik ' from that of the Catholic saints. The offerings of liquor and the autochthonous dance were made to the telluric beings in order to pacify them because they had just lost a part of their domain. Moreover, the copal, the holy water, and the right( the first corner in which the incense was used) are all an anathema to the Baatsik ' and consecrate the site as a space beyond their reach. These elements serve as markers, both concrete and symbolic, of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ opportunity to attend this practice because a few years ago the priest of Tantoyuca who, although seldom came to the hamlet, discovered this rite and banned it, and from then on only a member of the clergy could bless a house. Clearly, I was not the first one to perceive in this custom some " unorthodox " practices. This principle of displacement from one space to another with their particular connotations is at the foundation of a concrete social and cultural ambivalence. The Teenek body, and by extension, the Teenek house, the dances, the language, etc. contain two dimensions linked to specific sites in the landscape and to distinct historical and social times. However, we are not dealing with precise places in the Teenek space, but rather with a particular dualistic perception that attributes various roles to each one of the temporal dimensions represented by the pagan-autochthonous realm and the Christian-exogenous( but incorporated) order. This can be seen particularly in the Teenek birth ritual.The Birth Ritual In the Teenek birth ritual one @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ different spaces are established. However, in this case, the entire rite is held inside the domestic space. The illness--as delivery is considered--and the excess of pollution it produces places the parturient and the midwife into the realm of the Baatsik ' from which they have to extract themselves after the first seven days of seclusion. During that week of confinement the house 's space is no longer considered a Catholic and social space. This space becomes a limbo in which the child 's fate remains uncertain. Indeed, the house interior serves as a staging post, both spatial and symbolic, between the universe of the uterine darkness and that of social light. At the end of this spatial and temporal purgatory( the term is borrowed from Catholic theology without its religious contents), the boundaries between the two universes must be marked again. Thus, the midwife sweeps the house 's interior with purging herbs in order to flush the dirt from the domestic space and return it to the wild space of the Baatsik '. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ inside the house, which produces a pleasant odor that the Teeneks associate only with the Catholic saints of the social realm. It is at the threshold of the house, on the boundary between the social space and the domestic space, which, during the neonatal period remained indefinite, that the parents put the new-born child in the midwife 's arms with the utensils that will serve the baby later in his or her social life and which define him or her as a member of the society. Then, the midwife and the infant circle the house, explicitly symbolizing the life cycle that has just begun. Moreover, this walk begins on the right side, the one that is antithetical to the Baatsik ', and is performed holding a torch. The light is associated with the Catholic saints to whom one talks only in Spanish immediately after having circled the house. In front of the saints ' images the midwife crosses herself and recites the Ave Maria and the Pater Noster in Spanish. Then the midwife speaks @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to leave the child in good health. As in the healing rituals, the prayers to the saints are always said in Spanish, while the supplications for good health addressed to the Baatsik ' are made in Teenek. These distinctions clearly show the powers and limits of each of these divine entities as well as the sincere devotion to both of them. Due to their extraction from the underworld and their transitory situation that precedes their entrance into the Christian world, non-baptized Teenek children( in Catholic terms) are locally associated to the opossum( uut ' in Teenek ; tlacuache in Spanish). Furthermore, Veracruzan Teenek women carry their children in front of their bodies in a round piece of cloth slung diagonally over their shoulders and down their backs. This cloth is called an akilab, suggesting the way in which the offspring of the opossum cling to their mother in the marsupial pouch and echoing the association of a non-baptized Teenek child with that animal. In addition, the evil people one encounters at night( visions @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ "). The opossum is thus explicitly associated with the Baatsik ' who, while being underground spirits, they interfere with the lives of people. The indigenous baptism is thus complemented afterwards with the Catholic christening that erases, according to my Teenek interlocutors, the child 's condition of opossum. The two baptisms, indigenous and Catholic, are consequently complementary in the formation process of a person. The two ceremonies, the pagan and the Christian, create echoed responses to each other. The first ritual is an extraction of the soul whereas the second one is an immersion of the body. The soul of a Teenek individual is therefore the first element to be separated from the underworld. The body, considered to be that of an opossum--the animal of the Baatsik ' --until the Catholic baptism, follows the soul that has emerged initially. The midwife who carries the utensils that the child will use in his o her active life is replaced in the Christian rite with the godparents who receive food symbolizing the dawn of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the soul of the child, which required a period of time to be integrated into the child 's body and to be shown in society, the body of the child waits a certain time to be integrated into the religious institutional body that represents a much more vast social extra-ethnic body( cf. Slaney 1997). This time lapse between the travels of the soul and that of the body is repeated upon the death of an individual. His or her soul first leaves the body to go where the souls of the dead go, whereas the body is later buried( " sown ") in the earth.Discussion This duplication of the birth ritual in the indigenous and Christian spheres, observed as well among other Indian groups in Mexico(n20) applies among the Veracruzan Teeneks too for other life-cycle rituals like weddings and burials, which are always divided between the Catholic ritual held by the Mestizo priest in Spanish and in a rather impersonal way in Tantoyuca church, and the traditional ceremony held in a familiar fashion within the hamlet by the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ : 78-80). Although being part of the Christian world, Teenek people operate a bipartition of those rituals that express, as the other mentioned practices, an internal distinction between their origins, which is, I argue, at the core of Teenek ethnicity. The therapeutic rituals and other practices that demarcate the spaces between the Baatsik ' and the saints, and between traditional and contemporary realms ultimately express the Teenek notion of individual and ethnic person. Thus, the system of ethnic classification that is at the base of any ethnic identity( Levine 1999) is not, in the Teeneks ' case, in itself spatial, but is expressed in the language of space( cf. Kuper 1972 : 422). Indeed, in the Teenek case, it seems that the different categories of time are linked to different spaces in such a way that Teenek ethnic identity, based on a continuous dialogue with the ancestors as well as with their present-day successors expresses a social and cultural ambivalence. Paraphrasing Blu( 1996 : 221 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ painfully) the distinctiveness and reality of Teenek indianness. Furthermore, among the neighboring Catholic Nahua Indians of Postectitla, I observed that during the rain propitiating ritual of Chicomexochitl they demarcate the ritual territory in the mountain by circling it with paper figures representing different pagan deities( cf. Sandstrom 1997). Instead of representing their ambivalence of faith through symbolic objects, they represent it through a concrete spatial and linguistic partition between the Christian saints, to whom one speaks only in Spanish, and the spaces of those who fled the new faith, to whom one speaks only in Teenek. Like the people of the Malinche region in Central Mexico described by Hill( 1985), there is a functional balance between the use of Spanish and the native language shaped by the power relations between the national capitalistic sector and indigenous societies. Spanish is the idiom of the city and social distance while the native tongue is one of intimacy and identity( Hill 1985 : 727). But unlike the Malinche people, the distinctive use of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ tension between purists and laxists. The partitioning of space and languages between Teeneks and Baatsik ', or the alternation between autochthonous and exogenous spaces, is probably organized in order to preserve the balance between opposed forces( cf. Maybury-Lewis 1989), coping thus with the contradictions arising for a native society in its incorporation process into one single postcolonial society( cf. Comaroff and Comaroff 1987 : 206, n. 1). Taken together, these spaces form the contemporary Teenek identity forged out of five hundred years of interethnic contacts and elaborated through the indigenous notion of space and according to a temporal scale. The concrete spatial partitioning resolves the contradiction between the archaic tradition and the Christian universe, preserving the indigenous cultural patrimony in a specific space beyond the reach of the Christian saints and servicing it by a fervent cult. Because the two spaces are antithetical, they are preserved and they are complementary in a dyadic relation that forms the actual Teenek syncretic religion, which is ultimately a bipartite one. As for the Tarahumaras analyzed by @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ reality is formed within a monist universe because it deals with a unique creed played out in space and time. Moreover, in the villages, Teenek people often told me that a lot of town people in Tantoyuca who behave like Mestizos are actually native Teeneks but they do not believe anymore in the realm of the Baatsik '. Thus, attachment to place, together with Teeneks ' ideas of their own space, which is not based on ethnic exclusivity but rather on the historic multiethnic inscription into relief, is pivotal for the local sense of group identity. As will be discussed below, although Teenek culture and religion are syncretic, their ethnic identity emanates from the act of internally differentiating, and at the same time linking, the autochthonous space and the extraneous universe.The Shaping of Teenek Ethnicity Around Historical Events and Spatial Configurations Instead of presenting a detailed analysis of a specific practice related to one space, I have opted to present in a concise manner a complex of Teenek practices that make evident the concrete partitioning of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ conception of space or, in other words, a structure of meaning. Let us recapitulate the essential elements that appear in this partitioning of spaces. The practices involve spaces that demarcate the two universes in which the Teeneks live simultaneously : the space that belongs to the beings of the pagan past and by extension to tradition, and the space that belongs to the saints of the Catholic present and, by extension, to modernity. Each space corresponds to a specific place in the landscape, for example, the domestic space as opposed to the wild space, or the local chapel as opposed to the sacred pagan sites. These dual spaces may also inscribe themselves in the conception of the body : the left is the side with which one communicates with the Baatsik ' and the right is the side of the humans and the saints. This partitioning appears also in the classification of illnesses : those of the " body " which pertain to this universe and those of the " soul " which link the Teeneks with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to a specific attitude as well as a particular language : Teenek when one is in communication with the Baatsik ', Spanish when one has to negotiate with the elements considered Christian, foreign, or modern. Thus, if we take into account the Teenek historical narratives as a paradigm behind this symbolic configuration of the spaces--such as the opposition between the Christian and pagan spaces, the cultivated and wild, etc., which are present in the Teenek practices--it seems to stem not just from a dualistic organization but also from dialogical extrapolations inside the Teenek social universe. In order to concretize my observations and to deepen the analysis, I would like to present the testimony of Dionisio, the healer of Loma Larga, the Teenek hamlet where I did most of my research. His statement defines and amplifies the dualistic spatial conceptions which were discussed thus far : The inside of the earth is populated by the wicked, because those of the interior of the earth are against us, because it occurred this way. But when we @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with those we have to. The spirits hear us, they are with us ; the earth as well. This is a malign spirit. They are bad friends, bad brothers, bad ancestors. There they are, underneath the earth. This is the reason one should also talk to the earth, because they live below the ground. There are the dead who went beneath the earth. The spirits of these dead are here underneath. There their life is kept--inside the earth. That is the reason we have to come and see our spirits when we need to ask them forgiveness--first here with God, above, because we belong to this place, and then we also have to speak with the earth because there are the spirits. But we go there because the earth works differently. It has other forces. The earth does n't want to see crosses, does n't want to hear orisons. The earth does n't want us to cross ourselves, that we praise God, that we pray. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ This is the reason that we never pray with the earth, only when we go and look for God. With the Holy Cross, the orisons, we pray our beliefs in God but with the earth, never. The earth does n't like it, does n't want to see you with the cross, praying. The earth does n't want this. If you pray, you wo n't be received. The earth wo n't give you back your ch'ichiin. If you go and see the earth, you should n't pray because the earth does n't like prayers, does n't want candles, copal, nothing, because they are bad. They like bad treatments, loathsome things. What they like is satanic because they did n't want to see God. They did n't want to see the image of God. They did n't want to see good things, and because of that, they plunged underneath the earth. The Baatsik ', they do n't want nothing. They do n't want to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ hear what we like here, they do n't want to see dances with violins, nothing. They are angry, so they take a part of our chalap the thought under the ground, where they stay. They liked to go underneath the earth and we, those who do n't like to go below the ground, we stayed up here because we pray, we go to the baptism, because we go with Christ, with God. Those who did n't want to go with God, they were not baptized. They do n't go to church, they do n't learn to pray, they stay with the Baatsik '. Those who do n't want to go with God, do n't go to baptism, do n't learn to pray, to sing. They stay with the Baatsik ' and when the time arrives, they go directly where they are. They do n't go to heaven because they are not baptized. They do n't know to pray, to sing. They go directly where @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ are baptized we know that we are Christians, that we should pray, that we should know, that we should believe, that we should praise God. That 's the way we are. The ancestors, some of them stayed underneath the earth, others above. That 's the reason there are two places, one here with this one and the other over there with that one. There are two Gods, one is called Jonah, that is the one who runs the earth, and he is under the earth.( n21) The one above, this one is Jesus Christ, father God stays in the sky. Father Satan is inside the earth. He is the big robber of souls. You fall in the path or you see an animal, you go to a place where you meet bad things or bad people, this is coming from them, from Satan. This testimony explicitly sums up the practices described above. As a paradigm behind the expressed dualistic partitioning, we find the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their pre-human ancestors. We find in it, as well, the interiorization of the evangelization ideology as a dominant element in the explanation of current Teenek credo( cf. Hawkins 1984). The clear connection between the Baatsik ' plunge into the earth to avoid the arrival of the sun and missionary evangelism demonstrates the adaptation of this myth to history but also the interweaving of the indigenous culture with the European. The cultural distinctions between the Teenek and the Mestizos could thus be understood only apprehending them as constitutive of one single postcolonial society( cf. Grinker 1990 ; Hawkins 1984 ; Slaney 1997). As all of the tales about the appearance of the sun, whether they predate the Christian era or not, this myth reproduces a cosmic battle to become, literally or symbolically, the sole force for lighting the world. The universe of the Baatsik ' is thus associated with ancestry, autochthony, the earth, the Teenek language as well as decay, all of which are constitutive elements of Teenek contemporary culture that stand @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ These elements express the social and cultural ambivalence in which present day Teeneks live, an ambivalence that is at the foundation of their identity. Indeed, the Teeneks consider themselves on the one hand to be descendants of the Baatsik ', which means that they identify themselves with the archaic and pagan world, and as part of the modern and Catholic world, on the other. However, what seems to be at stake in these series of dualist oppositions in the Teenek practices is not the sort of universalist or Americanist human thought characterized by inversions of polarities, which were qualified by Lvi-Strauss as " the unstable dualism " specific to Amerindian thinking( Lvi-Strauss 1995 : 231). This kind of analysis, as Rasnake rightly put it, stays at the level of thought, out of time and praxis( Rasnake 1988 : 138) and makes little allowance for an historical consciousness within the mythical corpus( Hugh-Jones 1989 : 54). In this paper, I am rather interested in analyzing the relationships between myths and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 's cosmological reality is indeed characterised by dyadic oppositions.( n22) But in order to understand how the contemporary ethnicity of an Indian group is shaped, not only by its cultural background but also by its extra-communal surrounding and historical processes, it is important to socially and historically contextualize its practices and narratives( cf. Hugh-Jones 1989 ; Rasnake 1988 ; Roe 1988 ; Tedlock 1983) showing that, while they are expressed in a specific metaphorical idiom, myths keep pace with contemporary reality. Thus, interpreting those practices and narratives as " poetics expressions of history "( Comaroff and Comaroff 1987) ultimately allow us to extract from them the cultural idiom through which is expressed the historical and social consciousness of an ethnic group regarding the socio-economic configuration in which it is situated. In order to demonstrate the relationship between the mentioned Teenek practices and narratives with the contemporary interethnic situation, let us hear Dionisio again, this time explicitly regarding an historical and relatively recent event : It is said that the Teenek has become very poor because @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to be bad, he did n't want to wander at night, that did n't please him, he does n't like to kill people that is why he stayed like that. The ejek, the Spaniard, it pleased him to steal, to rob from the other. That pleased him to take what he found on the road, to kill, to steal money, to take livestock, because they are the ones who kill the Teeneks. That is why they are richer ; they managed like that to have money, to have beautiful houses, because they did not pity the Teeneks, because the Teeneks did not defend themselves because they are very torpid. All the possessions the Teeneks had, the ejek took from them, they took all the Teeneks 's livestock, they stole everything that is how they managed to have money. That is why now the ejek are settled well in the towns, in beautiful houses, it is because they have money, they took away a lot of animals @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ from them, the things they owned. The old people told us all that, when there was the Revolution, here the Huastecs had cows, horses, they had things, but now that the Revolution has ended the poor man has remained without animals as you can now see : they do n't have a house, no animals, nothing else. The ejek is there with his animals, with his cows, with his nice houses. The Huastecs can not fight against that because they are frightened, fearful, they do n't want to fight, they do n't want to kill their enemies, they do n't want to kill. The ejek does n't even have pity does n't even know what it is, they are soldiers, they shoot guns. In Mexico City, when the Spaniards arrived they say that the Huastecs probably the Aztecs fought, but not all, only a few. He who could, those who fought are those who took Mexico City, but not all are the same @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ alte '. Up until now, we are there, in the alte '. We are here in the alte ' because my grandparents and my parents did not want to fight, they did not want to fight so they went to hide. Those who like to fight went to the capital that is why those who are in Mexico City are the ones who fought, those who like fights, struggles, they liked killing. Those who did n't like that came here in the alte ', they stayed here, they walked and ultimately stayed here. Thus we are here, because my ancestors came here, in the alte ' thus, because they did n't want to fight, they did n't want to struggle, that is why there are Huastecs here in the alte '. Those who did n't want to fight against the Spanish people, against the foreigners, are here. The Spaniard had wars, did things, he frightened us, he took what we had ; he who did @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ situation( quoted in Ariel de Vidas 2004 : 305-308). In this account one finds the spatial positions of the Teeneks and the Mestizos defined by the power of violence. This narrative shows clearly the subjective construction of a subaltern culture in the articulation of power relations and a community 's identity( cf. Alonso 1995). The Teeneks did not want to fight against the newcomers and they thus took refuge in the alte ', the space of nature, the uncultivated space par excellence, the realm of the Baatsik ' which are their ancestors and source of their ethnic identity.( n23) Yet, according to this account, the Teeneks tend to avoid behaving like the Baatsik ' : they do n't wander at night, they do n't kill, they do n't steal and the like. Rather, it is the Mestizos who act that way, ultimately becoming rich at the expense of the Teeneks by taking their property, including their livestock, precisely like the Baatsik ' who stole the Western animals upon the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ejek are reputed to be capable of domesticating the Baatsik 's wild animals, such as snakes, owls, or jaguars-precisely those which Teeneks say they can not be domesticated since they belong to the beings of the underworld. As the " Inca transformation " of the Westerners operates in a Shipibo myth( Roe 1988), the Mestizos in Teenek myth are associated with the mighty ancestors to explain their wealth and power. " The ejek know how to dominate, they want everything, they want to be fearless. " But the Teeneks seem to exhibit a completely different attitude than that of the ejek. By refusing to fight against the soldiers, they fled, into the space of nature, into the alte ', the space of the telluric beings--thus rediscovering the mode of life of the pre-human ancestors. There is an imperfect return to the primitive era here, because there was a reversal, experienced as a cataclysm. According to this narrative, the Teeneks returned to the uncultivated space after the Revolution, but @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ relationship between the two groups is thus shaded by this incomplete reversal. It is like the Revolution, which, although it marked a turning point in Mexican history, did not dramatically change the situation for the Veracruzan Teeneks, and that episode remains in the collective memory rather as a true catastrophe. Recall that the pre-Revolutionary involved the historical creation of the current Teenek communities. Favored by various liberal laws and conjunctures at the end of the nineteenth century, the Teenek peons gradually bought the lands of the haciendas where they worked and held them in co-ownership. The condueazgo is in fact a form of communal land holding relating to the management of internal affairs and private property vis--vis outside institutions. This formula has enabled the territorial anchoring of the Teeneks--the boundaries of the current communities are drawn in most cases over those of the former haciendas--and the beginning of their social organization, as well as their reconstitution as an ethnic group as it is known today. Furthermore, it is difficult to evaluate the degree of the economic and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ twentieth century. One might imagine that those who had already achieved co-ownership experienced a phase of stability. Moreover, at that time, a sizable number of Teeneks still lived under the regime of the hacienda, which in that region was reduced above all to their obligation to work one day a week for the landowner in return for the right to cultivate a plot of land on his domain. Some descendants of hacendados in Tantoyuca assured me that, before the Revolution, the lot of the peons of their forebears was much better than it is today and that they, in fact, owned animals of all sorts, as is mentioned in the narrative cited earlier. Mentioning the current extreme poverty of the Teeneks, a ruddy man who lives off his yields in Tantoyuca asserted : " Their freedom is a good thing, but that does n't help them eat. " The Revolution, which occurred in 1910 and lasted for twelve years, permanently altered this presumed satisfactory situation. During the Revolution the Huasteca region was @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ they encountered on their way to provide them with food and animals to carry their equipment. Consequently, both sides accused the Indians of collaborating, and there were reprisals and pillaging against them : huts and harvests were burned, and there were thefts, rapes, executions, hangings, and similar assaults.( n25) The Indians were also forced to accept conscription into one or the other fighting groups of the region and, as a result, many of them chose to escape into the alte '. Today, old people report what their parents told them about that time : there was nothing to eat, and many died of hunger because the people ate only the little they could find in nature--roots of banana and papaya trees, croton seeds, t'udhub( Vitis mesoamericana--of the Vitaceae family), certain herbs, manioc, fruits from the ojox or breadfruit tree( Brosimum alicastrum--of the Moraceae family), and the like. In the aforementioned narrative, the relationship between the Teeneks and the figure of the abusive Mestizo @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it is completely interiorized in the practices and in local Teenek concepts regarding the " Other. " On one occasion, I asked the healer of Loma Larga to cure me. He responded by saying that the Teenek way is not applicable to non-Teenek persons. Arguing that we have the same body, I convinced him to treat me, and when we arrived at a specific tree in the bush where healing rituals are held, Dionisio spoke to that tree explaining, in Teenek, that though I was a stranger( ejek) I could harm no one. He added that since I do not steal, and was living in the hamlet, the Baatsik ' should help me. Furthermore, fear of the Mestizo is perceived as an ethnic trait, and when the chief of the dancers of the Dance of the Sparrow Hawk came back to the village after participating in a gathering of Mayan dances in the southern state of Campeche, he told me that all the dancers were actually Teeneks-not only because they were speaking @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ too, as they told him, feared the " rich. " Elsewhere, I analyzed in depth the social and abusive relationships endured by the Teeneks from their Mestizo neighbors( denigration, exploitation, spoliation) and how these interactions are interpreted and interiorized by the Teenek people I know( Ariel de Vidas 2004). This narrative rejoins the explanations given by Dioniso of the flight of the inhabitants of the hamlets when I arrived to begin my fieldwork. However, beyond the historical facts, have n't we already heard this same story of escaping into nature after another cataclysm, the one when the Baatsik ', who, not wanting to fight against the light, buried their heads into the earth? The Teenek narratives appear to compare Teeneks ' behavior in the face of the revolutionary disaster--and, in general, in the face of the ejek--to that of the Baatsik ' in the face of the arrival of another upheaval, that of the light. The Revolution was thus experienced as another disaster, well anchored in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ myth whose structure brings to mind that of a more distant catastrophe, one that became a founding myth of the Teenek ancestors and also explains their illnesses and their misfortunes. As McAnany rightly put it, ancestor worship is not ultimately " about the dead but about how the living make use of the dead "( McAnany 2000 : 484) and by extension, make use of the past. The same process can be seen among the Chamula Indians described by Gossen( 1999 : 25) where " new waves of others. are systematically relegated to a newly reconfigured past. " The traditional is an interpretative mode to understanding and legitimating the present, transfering the represented world into the past( Alonso 1995 : 10). Indeed, the same structure of thought is applied to explain illness( Baatsik ') as well as social misfortune( the Revolution and the Mestizos) giving the impression that little has changed. These two mythical tales, in the end analogous, seem to surface from a model of conveyance @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ identity and which is spatially expressed within the ethnic territory through different religious, social and corporal practices. As pointed out by Hugh-Jones, mythic thought distils from historical experience an ordered set of categories without obliterating its sources from consciousness( Hugh-Jones 1989 : 57). Indeed, these narrative repetitions and their associated practices ultimately transmit the message of the ethnic conflict that is at the origin of cataclysms and misfortune. In other words, the mythical tales and the practices related to them account for social configurations emanating from historical facts, and place on one side those who erupted into the indigenous world and on the other those for whom only a remembrance of it remains.Conclusions The dualist oppositions, which characterize the Teenek practices and narratives mentioned in this article emanate from a watershed event, evoked in the Teenek myth of origin, that alludes to the advent of Christianity and to their subjugation by a foreign culture. Today the Teenek world is characterized by an ambivalence of beliefs, which we can see in its partitioning of communal space @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the domain of the anti-social, they are nonetheless the ancestors, and as such they forged the group 's history. In other words, the Baatsik ' incarnate the constituent alterity of Teenek identity. Moreover, even while belonging to the infra-terrestrial world, the Baatsik ' remain the guarantors of Teenek morals here on earth. This is done through the mechanism of the illnesses that often strike the Teeneks because of territorial transgression or social lapses( Ariel de Vidas 2004). The punishment of excess by misfortune safeguards the social order and also serves as a reminder of the group 's common origin and collective memory. Masters of the earth, the Baatsik ' are thus the guardians of Teenek territory in its broadest sense. Hence, alterity is not opposite to the self but is in the self. This may explain the fact that even though historical consciousness among the Veracruzan Teeneks I met is a vivid and specific vision of social inequalities, it did not fuse( until now) into an ethno-political movement but rather into @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @). These symbolic and social configurations resulted in the Teeneks ' doubling of their boundaries. They have external boundaries vis--vis the Mestizo, marking the edge of their territory with strict rules of descent and residence, and internal boundaries vis--vis the Baatsik ', marking the edge of their contemporary syncretic religion and way of life, even while they acknowledge their faithfulness to their recalcitrant and overthrown ancestors. The internal notion of social marking illuminates the ambiguity of boundaries, which is probably what motivates societies to invest them heavily with symbolism( Cohen 1994 : 69). The proxemics approach adopted in this paper, that is, " the interrelated observations and theories of man 's use of space as a specialized elaboration of culture "( Hall 1966 : 1), allows us to grasp the Teenek sense of social singularity. The relation between locality and Indian identity has been well established in the Mesoamerican region. Numerous researchers stress how the dynamic understanding of indigenous practices and discourses is anchored in local worldviews and mechanisms and helps explain @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ecological and extra-ethnic environments( cf. for example : Brintnall 1979 ; Bunzel 1959 ; Hoffmann and Salmern Castro 1997 ; Tax 1941 ; Warren 1978 ; Watanabe 1992). Nevertheless, my concern in this article is not the analysis of the relation between identity and locality( town, village) or Indian identity as a corollary to non-Indian one within the national culture( Hawkins 1984). Rather, it concerns the analysis of a symbolically constructed space, which, in this case, includes the hamlet anchored in its uncultivated surroundings as well as in its regional, non-Indian context. In other words, it is not only the local social aspects( " knowledge, experience, and interpersonal familiarity needed to intuit events and individuals within such discourse " Watanabe 1992 : 15) but also the symbolic elaboration and practices that accompany them( which are themselves a contextual historical construction) that, when related to external parameters, forge the Teenek ethnic identity. My analysis of Teenek worldview as an autochthonous means in the organization of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ how the interethnic hierarchies are interiorized and translated into a symbolic mode in the organization of the intracommunal space. But contrary to other cases in which the " symbolism of subordination "( Warren 1978) is channeled toward exteriorized political or pan-Indian consciousness, Teenek orient it internally. They shape their communal space and boundaries in the same way in which they categorize " others " and identify themselves. Social relations with the cultural other are thus the main issue in this internal construction of ethnic identity, and they are expressed in two distinct spatial realms. The first one is positional and thus external ; as a social organization, Teenek ethnicity relies on regulated interactions through socio-political mechanisms, which maintain the community 's boundaries with the contemporary non-Teenek world. The second one is relational and thus internal ; as an element of culture, the Teeneks ' ethnic reference--that is the inner rationalization for their shared peculiarity and consciousness of unequal difference with their Mestizo neighbors--stems from their relations with their ancestors. These relations are expressed in the internal organization @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ exclusively. However, the story of the pre-human ancestors is not unrelated to historical processes and the set of external social relations. On the contrary, both formal and symbolic spatial manifestations of Teenek identity are integrally related. Through these processes of cultural duality, the Teeneks of Loma Larga thus attempt to find a delicate balance, which depends on their assets and on the social and historical context in which they are found. Their symbolic spatial and linguistic organization is in direct relation to the contemporary social order. Like the language of sites among the Swazi( Kuper 1972), the Teeneks ' spatial classification replicates their complex ethnic classification, embodied both in an enduring system and in historical change. Teenek communities are not separate, incommensurable cultures and Teenek people are not bounded and autonomous selves. Inside Teenek communal space, which is culturally plural( the inhabitants are Catholics and bilingual, children attend the hamlet 's official school where they are taught Spanish, people work outside the village, etc.), spatial classification provides @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the postcolonial situation is evoked but at the same time suspended( people pay respect to their autochthonous faith solely in the Teenek language). Their communal space permits the Teeneks to fully identify with their mythical and defeated ancestors and thus to re-enact in the symbolic realm the daily social drama that emanates from the colonial and post-colonial encounters. Nonetheless, the forms of Teenek resistance to the colonial and post-colonial domination, reflected in the discourses and practices about their ethnicity, mirror the extent to which they are still psychologically, symbolically subjugated. The Teeneks are thus dominated by the very form of their **26;2345;TOOLONG A preliminary version of this article was presented under the title " Luces del pasado, lugares del presente. La reparticin de los espacios entre los teenek de Veracruz( Mxico) " at the conference entitled : Espacios Mayas. Usos, representaciones, creencias, held in Paris in December 2000. Parts of this paper appear in my book Thunder Does n't Live Here Anymore( 2004). I am grateful for the always-pertinent @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ paper.Footnotes( n1) Fieldwork in Teenek villages, particularly in the hamlet of Loma Larga, was carried out between March 1991 and September 1993. I returned to the region several times between 1993 and November 1995 and again from September 2003 to June 2007 while conducting another research, this time among a nearby Nahua group. Research among the Teenek group was supported by the French Ministry of Education( 1990), the French Ministry of Research and Technology( 1990-1993), the Mexican Foreign Affairs Ministry( 1991-1993) and the Seminario de Estudio de la Cultura, CNCA, Mexico( 1994).( n2) According to data from Consejo Nacional de Poblacin( CONAPO), 2000. This official body measures marginality using different parameters, based on the percentage of population meeting the following criteria : - Quality of housing : Existence or absence of a sewage system, lavatory, running water, dirt floor, and electricity, as well as the crowding index( average number of occupants per room). - Monetary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ : number of inhabitants over the age of 16 who are illiterate or who have not completed primary school. - Population distribution : distribution of communities numbering fewer than 5,000 inhabitants.( n3) Huasteco is the external group denomination in Spanish, the language in which this testimony was given to me. In the Teenek language, Teenek is the ethnonym and it is used mainly among Teenek speakers themselves.( n4) Structured discourses, myths and narratives were told to me essentially by healers( men and women) and catechists( Teenek people who represent the Catholic Church in the hamlets) from Loma Larga and the surroundings Teenek villages. Other people, with a lesser narrative capacity, were often listening while nodding to the ongoing comments. I could also accompany many people( men, women, children and elders) in the healing rituals in the bush. All did certainly not share the same structured knowledge, but the practices related to it were common to all the inhabitants I met.( n5) See for @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Huastec people as drunken, dirty, sodomites, and backward( Sahagn 1977 1547-1582, vol. 3 : 204 ; Daz del Castillo 1977 1568, vol. 2 : 85). As for the current institutional approach, and more precisely the educational system expressed in the elementary school textbooks, the Aztec civilization is overwhelmingly privileged while the other pre-Hispanic ones are silenced.( n6) For a discussion on the polysemic uses of the term " ethnicity, " see Blu( 1980 : 218-227). For an excellent review of the various approaches to ethnicity see Jones( 1997 : 56-83).( n7) On the question of collective and ethnic identities see also Wachtel( 1992).( n8) It should be mentioned that, contrary to Indian villages in south Mexico and Guatemala, which are organized in a distinct administrative and social pattern based on colonial or sometimes pre-Hispanic configurations, most villages the Huasteca region were founded and organized in the 19th century or even at the beginning of the 20th century.( n9) @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the " Indian community " see Dehouve 2003.( n10) Veracruzan Teeneks( population of approximately 62,000 in 2000) differ in a number of ways from the Teeneks of the neighboring State of San Luis Potos( population of approximately 104,000 in 2000) analyzed by Alcorn( 1984). Some of the reasons for the differentiation between the two sub-ethnic groups were analyzed in Ariel de Vidas and Barthas( 1996).( n11) One of the first ethnographic studies written from this perspective was Cole and Wolf 's The Hidden Frontier( 1974).( n12) The land owned by the Veracruzan Teeneks is under the communal property regime, which means, in this case, that the Teeneks collectively acquired them before the Agrarian Reform enacted after the Mexican Revolution( 1910-1920). The dominant presence of cattlemen and their powerful lobbying organization in Tantoyuca is not unrelated to the fact that few post-revolutionary land grants( ejidos) were made in the region. For more detail on these topics and the relation between land tenure and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @( n13) See for example the writings of researchers working primarily among Andean and Mesoamerican societies, which were subjected to European influence far more intensively than the lowland populations such as those in the Amazon area : Abercrombie 1997 ; Ariel de Vidas 1995, 2002b ; Bunzel 1959 ; Farriss 1984 ; Galinier 2004 ; Lpez Austin 1993 ; Sandstrom 1991 ; Urton 1993 ; and Wachtel 1990.( n14) According to another Teenek myth, there was a preceding solar era( Ariel de Vidas 2004 : 139).( n15) Although separated from the Mayan populations of Southern Mexico and Guatemala by more than 1000 km, the contemporary Teeneks speak a language whose origin linguists situate in a Mayan migration dating thirty-two centuries ago( Manrique Castaeda 1979 ; McQuown 1964).( n16) This is not an implied allusion to sub-comandante Marcos--the myth was told to me in May 1993, prior to the Zapatistas insurrection in Chiapas in January 1994.( n17) For an understanding of the process of change in the meaning of contemporary Mesoamerican @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ sun and of Christianity see Lpez Austin( 1993).( n18) In Loma Larga, so far, all the inhabitants are adepts of a Mesoamerican version of Roman Catholicism. Evangelist religions do have several adherents in some of the Teenek villages of the environs, mainly those which are close to the main road.( n19) Of course, the phenomena of susto or espanto are not restricted to the Teeneks, and this kind of illness is wide spread both among indigenous and non-indigenous Latin American peoples( cf. inter alia Bolton 1981 ; Crandon 1983 ; Klein 1978 ; Lincoln 2001 ; Rubel 1964 ; Signorini 1981 ; Tousignant 1979 ; Trotter 1982). However, the Teeneks with whom I worked consider this illness unique to them, as it emanates from an imbalance in their specific relationships with their own telluric ancestors( Ariel de Vidas 2004).( n20) See for example : Marion 1994 : 24-39 ; Redfield and Villa Rojas 1962 : 188-190 ; Slaney 1997 ; Villa Rojas 1978 : 412-415.( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a name deriving from an exogenous mythological corpus, is analyzed in Ariel de Vidas( 2004 : 257-259). In Teenek, the chief of the Baatsik ' is called buk ik ' -- " seven winds. "( n22) See Lpez Austin( 1989 ; 1993). For a concise description of Mesoamerican cosmology, see Gossen( 1986).( n23) Cf. with the spatial ethnic distinction in Zaire between the Lese who are " of the village " and the Efe who are " of the forest "( Grinker 1990).( n24) Lack of space precludes a proper discussion on Teenek concepts and values of work, which differ from those of the Mestizo, according to Teenek view. For an interesting discussion on the notion of work/labor among native peoples as contrasted to the values of the dominant society, see inter alia : Comaroff and Comaroff 1987 and Good Eshelman 2005.( n25) Comments reiterated by old informants and also described in the autobiographical account of a former revolutionary from the Huasteca @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 
