4020141 The established professional practice requiring informed consent for the disclosure of personal health information with its implied right to privacy suffered a serious setback with the first federal privacy initiative of the Bush administration. The new Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act( HIPAA) of 1996( P.L. 104-191) privacy regulations supplant the patient 's veto regarding disclosure with the requirement that the patient simply receive a written notice of the provider 's policy on disclosure of personal health information. As the privacy paradigm shifts to balance the business interests of the health care industry with those of individual patients, this policy presents new challenges for protecting the confidential relationship between the practitioner and the patient. This article reviews the significant modifications in the new HIPAA regulations, briefly critiques these changes, and suggests strategies for practitioners to manage these changes. KEY WORDS : confidentiality ; ethical practice ; HIPAA ; personal health information ; privacy The vital importance of clients ' right to make their own decisions about disclosure of their health information suffered a serious blow with a highly significant policy shift affecting the way in which health care @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Clinton policy ensuring informed consent for disclosure of any health care information, thereby abrogating the patient 's right to veto the transmission of this information( Pear, 2002). The new privacy regulations of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act( hereinafter, HIPAA)( P.L. 104-191 ; Standards for Privacy, 2002) replace the requirement for patient authorization with only a notice of the provider 's privacy policy. The supplantation of the patient 's right to control the disclosure of information with a privacy policy notice, along with other modifications in the new HIPAA regulations, promises to have a far-ranging impact on health care delivery in this country. This policy shift requires social workers to develop new ways of managing client information and to respond strategically to the way in which client health information is managed in the health care industry. HISTORY OF PRIVACY AND PRIVACY REGULATION The genesis of medical privacy and confidentiality is found in the Hippocratic Oath, which directs the physician not to reveal private patient information( Resier, Dyck, &; Curran @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ testimonial privilege in New York State in 1828( Nye, 1982), there had already been a long-standing and widespread acceptance of the physician 's duty to maintain patient information as private and confidential. The importance of protecting patient health information by nonphysicians was prompted by the growth of health care in the mid-20th century and was acknowledged by the expansion of testimonial privilege to other health and mental health professionals. This privilege was first established in the state court systems( Foster, 1982) and was later introduced to the federal judiciary for social work psychotherapists in the Jaffee v. Redmond( 1996) decision. The regulation of confidentiality in health care was extended to conditions such as AIDS and substance abuse, then to public health and research. Although confidentiality protects the patient from harm caused by disclosure, exceptions may require disclosure to protect third parties from harm( Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, 1976). The importance of maintaining confidentiality can be seen in the sanctions and penalties provided by law( Dickson, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ has given rise to reorganization of service delivery into new forms, including preferred provider organizations, health maintenance organizations, large group practices, and multiple-hospital corporations. As a result, more people have access to patient medical records than previously. Not only has computerization of patient records expanded access, it has increased the potential for breaches of privacy to a level that was previously impossible( Rice &; Katz, 2001). Access continued to expand with the growth of third-party payer systems and their demands to justify payment. The compilation of patient records in large databases made possible large-scale public health research into patterns of illness, effective treatments, and improved quality of care. The benefits associated with patient data banks encouraged the creation of a national health information infrastructure( Committee on Maintaining Privacy, 1997). In 1996 the drive to establish this infrastructure received a boost with the establishment of HIPAA. Before HIPAA, employee benefits terminated with employment. HIPAA established the continuity of these benefits for an 18-month transition period to new employment @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ health identifier to track the medical services provided throughout a person 's lifetime. Furthermore, this requires the development of a national health infrastructure, which quickly raised public concerns regarding privacy. HIPAA provided that if Congress did not enact privacy legislation within three years, the Secretary of Health and Human Services( HHS) was directed to issue the privacy regulations governing identifiable personal health information( PHI). To strike a good balance between an individual 's need for privacy and the health care system 's need for the appropriate flow of information, the Secretary of HHS recommended a relaxation of consent procedures and their replacement by federal regulation. After a process of public comments, HHS finalized the privacy guidelines that became effective on April 14, 2003( Appelbaum, 2002 ; Cady, 2003). AN OVERVIEW OF THE HIPAA CHANGES The intent of the HIPAA privacy regulations is to clarify and limit those situations in which a person 's PHI may be used by health care providers, health plans, and health care clearinghouses. Any @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ HIPAA( 45 C.F.R. 164.502). " PHI " refers to any demographic information that identifies the patient, thereby revealing her or his health status or history( 45 C.F.R. 164.501). However, HIPAA does not restrict the use of health information that has been de-identified( 45 C.F.R. 164.514 a-c). A central tenet of HIPAA is the requirement to provide patients with a written notice of the provider 's privacy policy regarding disclosure of PHI. Under the new regulations, the notice of privacy practices is applicable only to information released for the purposes of treatment, payment, or health care operations( 45 C.F.R. 164.502). The new privacy regulations cover certain routine uses of information such as health care information sent to insurance companies, to providers involved in the care and management of the patient, and for other administrative uses that were previously protected. The nonroutine uses for which a specific authorization is still required include health care information sent to employers or information used for sales and marketing purposes( 45 C.F.R. 164.508 a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the regulations that allows the patient access to her or his records, to object to the content, and to request an accounting of any nonroutine disclosures or uses of that information( 45 C.F.R 3164.524, 164.526, 164.528). For practitioners in the business of health care, HIPAA contains additional administrative requirements, strategies, and organizational options. Consent Replaced by Privacy Notice All providers of health care services must now notify their clients in writing regarding their policies on the release and transmittal of PHI. The privacy notice must include the provider 's duties to protect privacy, a notice of the provider 's privacy practices, and the individual 's right to complain to the HHS Office of Civil Rights. Providers must make a good-faith effort to obtain the client 's written acknowledgment of having received that notice before services begin, whenever possible( 45 C.F.R. 164.520). Client consent is not required unless state law mandates it. However, the provider may choose to continue seeking the patient 's formal consent. Although the federal requirement @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ protect confidentiality by establishing their own policies, protocols, and procedures. HIPAA allows providers to shape these policies in accordance with their business needs( 45 C.F.R. 164.530). Disclosures Permitted for Treatment, Payment, and Health Care Operations No client consent is required for routine disclosures, although all other uses of information are prohibited without a specific consent. The information that may be disclosed is based on professional judgment regarding what is the minimum necessary information for its intended use( 45 C.F.R. 164.514 d 1). Limited, unavoidable, incidental disclosures that occur in the course of routine operations do not constitute violations of HIPAA( 45 C.F.R. 164.502). All providers who have a patient in common may share that patient 's PHI among themselves for the purposes of treatment and payment. However, when providers in the course of their business need to disclose PHI with business associates( subcontractors or others), the new regulations require them to ensure the same HIPAA privacy standards by entering into a formal contractual agreement( 45 C.F.R. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ exclusions to disclosure of PHI still requiring patient authorization : one is for marketing( 45 C.F.R. 164.501,164.508a 3) ; the other is for employment records( 45 C.F.R. 160.103). For any marketing-related purpose that does not directly pertain to treatment, written patient consent is still needed. When employers are also providers covered under HIPAA, any medical and employment records must be maintained separately. In this case, the medical records are covered under HIPAA, whereas the employment records are not. Safeguards to Privacy New safeguards have been built into the HIPAA regulations to ensure protection of health care information. First, to ensure the security of electronically transmitted health data, HIPAA requires the establishment of administrative, technical, and physical safeguards( 45 C.F.R. 164.530c). Another safeguard pertains to hybrid businesses, those that provide both health care functions and additional unrelated business functions. Hybrid businesses have two choices : to designate all health care and non-health care functions separately or to consider the entire business as a health care business. If the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ functions separately, then the entire business must comply with the HIPAA privacy rules( 45 C.F.R. 164.103, 164.105). A third safeguard pertains to how much information is disclosed. The minimum necessary rule for disclosure implies different standards of compliance depending on the specific purpose for sharing that information. This rule requires providers to develop separate policies, protocols, and procedures for the internal, the routine, or the nonroutine uses of information( 45 C.F.R. 164.530i). A fourth safeguard applies to actions patients may take to ensure the protection of their privacy. Patients may request access to their records and a list of all the nonroutine disclosures of their PHI. They also have the right to disagree with the information contained in their records and to have errors corrected( 45 C.F.R. 164.524, 164.526). Research, Psychotherapy, and Practice with Minors For practitioners who engage in research, engage in psychotherapy, or whose practice involves minors, there are additional provisions of special interest. HIPAA relaxes the earlier requirements for patients ' @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ data sets and also forbids the re-identification of patients. Decisions regarding the appropriate use of de-identified data may rely on professional judgment( 45 C.F.R. 164.502d 2, 164.514a-b). PHI may be used for research when there is documentation of a waiver of individual consent granted by an Institutional Review Board and also for preparation of a research protocol that specifies that PHI data will not be removed from their source. Limited data sets with PHI may be used, providing that the researcher enters into a data-use agreement. The previous limited time frames for the expiration of a research authorization are now less specific. These changes are intended to open new avenues of research in public health and epidemiology and in the identification of actuarial patterns( 45 C.F.R. 164.502a, 164.514e). Psychotherapy notes( 45 C.F.R. 164.501, 164.508a 2) always require a specific patient authorization for their release, which is an exception to the HIPAA regulations. Psychotherapy notes may be used for in-house training purposes. All exceptions to requiring authorization for psychotherapy notes are governed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ mandatory reporting laws. For practitioners who work with minor children, minor children 's privacy rights continue to be defined by relevant state law( 45 C.F.R. 164.502g). In those cases where the parent of a minor is not his or her legal representative or where the minor may exercise consent, the minor 's privacy would be protected by the HIPAA regulations. If state law is silent concerning parental access to PHI, providers who are licensed health care professionals have the discretion to provide or deny that access( 45 C.F.R. 164.502g). A BRIEF CRITIQUE OF THE NEW REGULATIONS The implications of the policy changes outlined are subtle and significant. Rather than providing statutory protection for the right to privacy of health care information, the new regulations severely reduce a patient 's control over her or his own health care information in favor of a written notice regarding the disclosure policy for routine uses. Without the control of PHI through the right to veto any specific disclosure, the individual patient is in actual practice subject to potentially unintended @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ becomes potentially more damaging as the health care information becomes more sensitive, such as in the case of genetic testing, psychiatric treatment, drug testing, or HIV/AIDS status( Cady, 2003 ; Dickson, 1998). Although the regulations restrict access to PHI for specific purposes, the reality is that when more people have access to information, there is a greater potential for breaches of confidentiality. With the wide electronic availability of patient information and the increased dependence on electronic storage and retrieval systems, it would be reasonable to expect an even wider distribution of health care information. The amount of data transferred in the course of normal operations is voluminous and may be vulnerable to error and intrusion by others( Committee on Maintaining Privacy, 1997 ; Dennis, 2000). The shift of control of health care information from the patient 's having veto power to control by those who are not personally affected may increase the potential of misuse to the patient 's detriment( Woodward, 2001). This risk of misuse and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ potential benefits to society from new public health research. With increased access to large-scale databases, researchers can investigate the patterns of disease occurrence among different groups and the factors associated with them to a degree that was not possible before. Before HIPAA relaxed the consent requirements for research purposes, certain kinds of data were inaccessible, for example, when patient consent could not be obtained because of the cost or difficulty in locating patients. The current availability of such data broadens the scope of public health research. Large-scale databases permit the identification of those actuarial patterns that may lead to policies that increase cost-effectiveness for health care organizations. Although this may be beneficial to organizations, these policies can lead to detrimental effects for individual patients, such as restricting access to needed high-cost procedures. One of the strengths of the HIPAA regulations is limiting disclosures without authorization to those needed for the functions of treatment, payment, or health care operations. Although these functions are broad and pertain to the provider, control of information beyond the provider @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ agreements ensure that any business associates or internal departments with access to PHI follow exactly the same privacy provisions, regardless of whether they include any non-health care functions. The regulations permit each business to determine how to implement the privacy safeguards to meet that organization 's business needs. Although the system of privacy protections in the new regulations is theoretically sound, these protections are predicated on a complex system of business arrangements and industry standards ensuring data security. With a myriad of resulting structures, systemic failures may be difficult to identify quickly( Committee on Maintaining Privacy, 1997), and hence any failures may potentially compromise the safeguards promised in the new HIPAA regulations. To ensure the safety of health care data, HIPAA establishes a series of requirements for data security and penalties for both negligent and willful violation of its provisions. Penalties for violations of the HIPAA regulations include the right to private action, civil penalties, criminal sanctions where appropriate, and protection from retaliation. Criminal penalties for both disclosure and reception of PHI begin @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @( P.L. 104-191 ; 42 U.S.C. 1320d-5, 1320d-6). The minimum necessary rule stipulates that when any information is released, the extent of information disclosed is based on the intended purpose of the disclosure. HIPAA mandates that health care organizations develop policies and procedures to limit who has access, who may receive information, and how much information they may receive. All employees must be trained in the HIPAA requirements based on their roles in the organization( 45 C.F.R. 164.530b). Whether practicing individually or in an organization, the health care professional who is responsible for the patient 's treatment decides what is the minimum necessary information to be transmitted. In deciding what is the minimum necessary information to transmit, the professional needs to carefully consider the intended purpose of the disclosure. Particularly in the case of information that can be compiled in large databases, there may be an underlying conflict of incentives between the practitioner and the receiving organization. The practitioner may be influenced by the desire to secure services in the client 's best @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ health care organization may be motivated primarily by financial considerations that include collecting data to assist in developing new cost-containment policies( Rodwin, 1993). The new regulations place providers in the difficult position of being the primary protector of patient privacy. The notice of the provider 's privacy practices, which replaces the authorization for disclosure form, is required only at the beginning of the relationship with the provider. Because there is no requirement to inform patients of any disclosure that is made, it is in patients ' best interest to review their records periodically, to correct misinformation, and to obtain an accounting of the nonroutine disclosures. Although this periodic review is necessary to ensure that one 's privacy is fully protected, this can be a formidable obstacle to less-educated or - empowered clients. A significant change in the new regulations is that all disclosures for the purpose of general marketing require prior authorization. Certain targeted uses are permitted, such as marketing about health aids for a patient 's specific condition( 45 C.F.R. 164.501,164.508a 3 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the provider of health care is also the patient 's employer. The employee 's health care information is protected in the same manner as the medical record of any other patient and must be maintained separately from employment records( 45 C.F.R. 160.103). However, this may present a conflict of interest. For example, the employee may be required to release her or his PHI to justify an absence from work. When this occurs, he or she becomes vulnerable to any consequences flowing from this information becoming part of the separate employment record, which is not protected by the HIPAA regulations. As the preceding review of HIPAA suggests, there seems to be a subtle underlying conflict between the privacy interests of the individual and the business interests of the health care system. On the surface, this shift away from the primacy of individual privacy may appear benign. However, the impetus behind this shift lies in its underlying assumptions and in the policy thrust to support the economic interests of the corporate health care industry. Although @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ this article, it does suggest that the subtle coercion of the professional practitioner may be necessary to achieve the industry 's financial goals( Woodward, 2001). The new HIPAA regulations ask practitioners to expand their focus from the interests of the individual to include those of the managerial health care industry. Practitioners are likely to experience this as an ethical conflict between the requirements of confidentiality in the NASW Code of Ethics( NASW, 2000) and in state licensing statutes and the practical applications of the new regulations. The code of ethics and the licensing statutes require the practitioner to act in the best interest of the client, including protecting her or his confidentiality. The challenge for practitioners is to maintain their professional stance in an environment in which business incentives dominate and in which maintaining professional integrity may come at a personal cost to them( Dickson, 1998). WHAT PRACTITIONERS CAN DO TO PROTECT PRIVACY Practitioners, as an integral part of the health care system, need to devise strategies to protect client privacy, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ full implementation of HIPAA, the new health care environment will call for changes in practice that necessitate a rethinking of the mechanisms of maintaining confidentiality. Attention to Client Vulnerability Practitioners, cognizant of their clients ' dependency and vulnerability, especially those clients who are medically or psychiatrically compromised, also need to be sensitive to those disclosures that may have negative consequences. For this reason, clinicians assess clients ' current state and competence to assimilate information about confidentiality and disclosure. Securing informed consent before disclosing PHI is a professional responsibility. Other clients may also have special needs for reassurance and protection to ensure that their privacy will not be compromised. For example, those who are involved in custody disputes or divorce, who are at legal risk, or who are socially prominent may need special protection( Dickson, 1998). In addition to the inherent vulnerability of clients, particular stages in the clinical process tend to elicit more intimate and sensitive disclosures. These will most likely occur at the point where an assessment or reassessment is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their risks and benefits( Cady, 2003). Attention to the client 's state and to those times when new disclosures are most likely to occur will help ensure the continued protection of sensitive client information. Case Recording The discussion of sensitive information is the heart of clinical process( Egan, 1994). Only information that is transmitted is subject to being compromised. Therefore, an increased awareness of what content is or is not necessary to document is essential to protect the client and the privacy of her or his PHI. If practitioners limit their case recording to the minimum necessary to meet the clinical and fiscal requirements of the setting, then they also omit most sensitive information. Judicious recording not only protects clients from unforeseeable negative consequences, but also is a professional responsibility and good practice( NASW, 2000). Informing Clients on the Limits of Confidentiality Electronic Transmission of Information. Because judicious recording can not protect against all disclosures of sensitive information, the practice of informing clients of the limits of confidentiality has @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ made the transmission of health care data easy, and consequently, it limits practitioners ' control over who may have access to clients ' information( Rice &; Katz, 2001). Although HIPAA requires all health care entities to develop systems to protect confidentiality and to enter into contractual agreements with all business associates, breaches can still occur. The control of information under HIPAA shifts from the control of the individual practitioner to the control of the system. Therefore, practitioners are obligated to discuss with their clients the real limits of confidentiality and to inform them that they can no longer ensure complete confidentiality( Appelbaum, 2002 ; Dickson, 1998). Client Rights and Options. Clients must understand where breaches of confidentiality may occur in the information disclosure process( Cady, 2003) to be sufficiently informed to exercise their rights. Breaches may occur in organizations because of competing priorities. For example, business objectives can easily take precedence over privacy concerns within the medical records, patient accounts, or fiscal planning departments of a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of these differing interests to communicate the privacy risks to their clients( Dickson, 1998). Various options to protect the confidentiality of their PHI remain open to clients. Some of these strategies include the nondisclosure of certain information, paying out of pocket rather than using insurance, and negotiating about the recording of sensitive information. Practitioners may, within the limits of the practice setting, continue to elicit client permission before disclosing any information and to negotiate the terms of disclosure with the client. Clients may object to the disclosure policy, but HIPAA does not guarantee that this objection will be accommodated. Practitioners may encourage their clients to exercise the options that HIPAA provides to monitor the dissemination of their PHI by, for example, reviewing their file at the Medical Information Bureau. Communication. Clear and open communication between practitioners and clients is always good practice( Egan, 1994). Clients may perceive that treatment is conditional on the acceptance of a practitioner 's privacy policy. Usually, a practitioner can mitigate against any @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. The practitioner should further encourage clients to discuss any privacy questions or concerns they may have, including how privacy is protected in the practice. That interchange opens discussion of the risks and benefits of disclosure in the client 's specific situation and ensures the client 's understanding. The dialogue about privacy provides the context and opportunity to empower clients by educating them about their prerogatives and the recourses that are available under HIPAA. Practitioner Education Continuing education is very important in a rapidly changing health care environment( Committee on Maintaining Privacy, 1997). Practitioners need to understand HIPAA 's privacy provisions and how these provisions affect their practice and their business associates regarding treatment, payment, and health care operations. HIPAA requirements include privacy notices, authorizations, how PHI is handled, and disclosure of the minimum necessary information. Practitioners need to increase their awareness and remain vigilant to stay informed about changing requirements related to HIPAA. Practitioners need to take advantage of the opportunities to share best practices through workshops, conferences, peer consultation, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ preempt state statutes that are more protective of privacy. Therefore, it is incumbent on practitioners to understand and educate themselves on the applicable state laws affecting privacy. The Business of Practice Practitioners who are in the business of practice need to review their policies to ensure that they meet at least the minimum privacy requirements of HIPAA. Practitioners who use contractors or have other business associates handling PHI are required to enter into business contracts that obligate the business to follow the HIPAA privacy standards( 45 C.F.R. 164.502 el). Protecting client PHI is also an effective risk-management practice because it minimizes legal liability, reduces exposure to lawsuits, and thereby protects the assets of the practice( Cady, 2003). In summary, effective practice strategies, such as those discussed, can minimize the negative impact that the disclosure of PHI may have on clients in the new health care environment. CONCLUSION Although the unintended consequences of breaches of confidentiality can be devastating to the individuals involved, they can not be prevented in actual practice either by @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of PHI to institutional and regulatory control necessitates monitoring to ensure the full implementation of the interlocking systems of business agreements, data security, and adequate employee training. Clients ' exercise of their statutory rights is pivotal to the protections promised by HIPAA. The need for vigilance on the part of practitioners to ensure maximum privacy protection for their clients in a changing health care environment requires an armory of potential strategies. Although practitioners ' strategies may offer some protection to clients, social workers also need to be cognizant of policy changes in the health care environment that affect privacy. In addition, social workers might consider becoming more active in support of reforming privacy regulations. REFERENCES By Julia A. Yang and Francis A. Kombarakaran Julia A. Yang, MSW, is adjunct instructor, College of Social Work, Ohio State University, Columbus. Send correspondence to Julia A. Yang, 5247 Griffen House Court, Columbus, OH 43235 ; e-mail : jyang@gcfn.net. Francis A. Kombarakaran, PhD, is adjunct faculty, School of Social Work, Adelphi @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 
