4158041 MODERN DEMOCRACY IS, ABOVE ALL ELSE, a procedural ideal. To be sure, high substantive hopes are often placed in democracy. Yet the essence of democracy lies not in the specific outcomes that it may( or may not) help reach, but in a set of procedures that ensure, in the words of Philippe Schmitter and Terry Karl, that " rulers are held accountable for their actions in the public realm by citizens, " who act primarily " through the competition and cooperation of their elected representatives. " 1 Historically, the main political arena in which democratic procedures have been implemented, and the main reference point for democratic theory, has been the state. According to a well-established argument, the democratization of non-state entities--such as international and supranational organizations or transnational networks with various degrees of institutionalization--is therefore faced with significant conceptual and practical challenges.2 This article seeks to assess the severity of these challenges : Can democratic procedures be transferred to political entities " beyond the state, " or is democracy doomed to failure in non-state contexts? # The European Union( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ answer this question.3 The EU, according to most accounts, is not a state--nor does it claim to be one. It has, on the other hand, been embroiled in debates about democratization for at least the past two decades. Given the growth of its policy responsibilities, the old argument that democracy is not needed in the EU has lost its persuasiveness. This argument relied on the assumption that EU decisions concern only issues about which citizens care very little, 4 not least because these decisions are mainly regulatory in kind and do not have any distributive impact.5 Both claims no longer hold. This is dramatically illustrated by the EU 's response to the Eurozone financial crisis, during which EU leaders authorized significant financial transfers between member states while forcing the recipients of bailout funds to adopt far-reaching austerity measures, often with painful impact on the citizens. # The growing consequentiality of EU decisions has, over the past decades, motivated a number of reforms to the EU treaties that aimed explicitly at democratization. The EU now @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ governance institution. These reforms have not been enough, however, to lay to rest concerns about the EU 's " democratic deficit. " The reason for these concerns is that the crucial democratic principle of accountability is still insufficiently realized. Neither the making of public policy nor the selection of leadership personnel in the EU is subject to open political competition in the public realm, and the decisions taken on these issues are not visibly affected by citizens ' political participation.6 As a result, it is unclear who deserves praise or blame for EU decisions, and what can be done if one wants to " throw the rascals out. " # This article discusses whether the EU 's non-state character lies at the root of these difficulties in democratization. The article proceeds in three steps. First, it canvasses the main arguments used to claim that democracy can not easily be detached from the state and transferred to the EU level. Second, it shows that these arguments take insufficient account of the multilevel character of the EU, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ used to support the EU 's democratic legitimation. The core problem of democratization in the EU is therefore not due to the fact that the EU is not a state ; the emphasis that some authors put on its non-state character as an obstacle to democratization is misplaced. Rather, as the third section shows, the " democratic deficit " of the EU is rooted in the peculiar institutional design of its multilevel system. The concluding section develops some thoughts about the lessons that these findings hold for other non-state entities in world politics. # TRANSFERRING DEMOCRACY TO NON-STATE ENTITIES # What Is the Problem? # The modern state can be defined by three bundles of characteristics.7 First and foremost, it is a system of governing institutions designed to generate and implement binding collective decisions for a specific territory and population. This implies that states possess a developed decision-making and administrative apparatus, regulated by law, and generally funded through taxation. A second bundle of characteristics focuses on the state 's internal and external sovereignty. This means that the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, that the state exercises a monopoly of force within its territory, and that it can regulate its affairs without outside interference. Finally, a third bundle of characteristics focuses on the state 's internal and external recognition. Internally, this refers to the state 's legitimacy in the eyes of the population, most importantly to the fact that the citizens consider themselves members of the state and respect its monopoly of force. Externally, it means that a state 's existence, character, and sovereignty are acknowledged by other international actors( states and international organizations). # As Table 1 shows, the EU possesses many state-like features, but falls short of statehood in the full sense of the term. Its governing institutions can only operate through the member states, which implement their rules, finance their activities, and define the EU 's territory and population. Furthermore, the EU 's sovereignty and recognition are problematic, in both cases primarily in the internal rather than in the external sense : With respect to sovereignty, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ own competences--it lacks what German jurisprudence calls Kompetenz-Kompetenz--and that it does not have institutions that directly interact on a regular basis with the citizens, let alone exercise a monopoly of force. With respect to recognition, the crucial problem is that the citizens ' sense of belonging to the EU, and to a European political community, remains weak. # Can we make a case, then, that the EU would need to acquire these missing state features to become fully democratic? In the literature on the EU 's democratization, three versions of this argument can be identified. The first of these positions focuses on sovereignty, especially the EU 's lack of Kompetenz-Kompetenz. This position has been brought forward in contributions by legal scholars--most prominently Dieter Grimm8--in discussions of the EU 's constitutional project that ultimately failed in 2005. Regarding the relationship between democracy and the state, it makes the following claims : # Democracy means popular sovereignty ; it requires that citizens exercise collective self-rule in regard to all aspects of political life. This includes decision @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ governing institutions. # For the EU, full-scale democratization would hence imply that EU citizens, and not member states, have the power to decide about the EU 's constitution, and the competences the EU is granted therein. This means that the power to decide about EU competences would be exercised at the EU level( by the people of the EU, rather than the peoples of the member states). In other words, the EU would gain Kompetenz-Kompetenz. # If the EU possessed Kompetenz-Kompetenz, this would enable it to acquire the other missing institutional elements of sovereign statehood as well. As Grimm argues, an EU with a constitution legitimated by the citizens " would in principle also have the power within the constitution to decide? on its endowment with resources, including taxation, instead of being dependent on transfers from the Member States. These features are not those of an association of States. They typify the State. " 9 # In this line of reasoning, full-scale democratization would automatically make the EU a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. The prospect of an EU state, however, is generally seen as undesirable by authors arguing for this position. One reason is that the citizens do not seem ready to accept it. A second reason is that it would have negative implications for the member states. After all, the traditional doctrine of German constitutional law treats sovereignty as indivisible.10 In this view, if Kompetenz-Kompetenz--the crucial element of sovereignty--were acquired by the EU, the member states would lose it. Hence, their statehood, and by implication their democracy, would be undermined.11 The only feasible solution to the EU 's democratic deficit, therefore, is less European integration, not more European democracy. # The second argument that is commonly used to establish a link between European democracy and statehood focuses on another aspect in which the EU currently diverges from the state model, namely its precarious legitimacy in the population. This position can be associated with a republican conception in democratic theory. Authors applying this conception, such as Claus Offe or Stefano Bartolini, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ weakness of European identities and the resulting fragmentation of Europe 's public sphere. We can summarize this argument as follows : # Democracy requires a demos--a community of citizens who identify with the polity and all of its members, are willing to become engaged for it, and accept personal concessions for the polity 's greater good. This is necessary to enable political deliberation in a common public sphere, to aid the emergence of intermediary political structures such as parties and interest groups, and to foster a sense of solidarity in the population that can legitimate majority decisions and redistributive policies. # At the state level, such a demos developed in the interrelated processes of democratization and nation building. Democratic nation states ground their demos in the nation, which constitutes the most important source of citizen solidarity and identity. # While a demos based on transnational foundations is not inconceivable, there is as of now little evidence that strong forms of solidarity and identity have developed, or even can develop, beyond the state. As Offe argues @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ that it " lacks the capacities which have played a crucial role in the formation of the societies of nation states, namely the capacity to impose military conscription and action, to impose educational standards and curricular powers, and to directly extract taxes from( what only then would be) a ' European people. " ' 13 # We should note that in contrast to the first argument, the connection between democracy and the state that is posited here is historical and not conceptual. This is why the second argument is independent of the first : Most proponents of the first argument have no problems accepting the second argument as well, but the reverse is not true. In fact, there are optimistic versions of the republican position, by authors such as Jrgen Habermas, 14 which claim that if the EU acquired additional institutional features of statehood, such as fiscal autonomy and powers to implement social programs with immediate relevance for the citizens, it would become more visible in the population and a transnational demos and public sphere @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ converge in concluding that an EU with the existing non-state features--little direct interaction between EU institutions and citizens, no popular legitimation of the EU constitution and its division of competences, little grounding of EU institutions in imagined communities--cannot be democratic in the full sense of the term. # In contrast to the first two arguments, the third argument used to establish a linkage between democracy and the state relies not on a specific substantive understanding of democracy, but on the idea that democracy has, over time, come to be associated with certain state-based ideas and institutions. The problem, then, is not that non-state entities can not conceivably be democratized, but that their democratization would require a change in entrenched conceptions of democracy. Variants of this argument have been presented by authors such as Philippe Schmitter and Michael Goodhart.15 Their reasoning is as follows : # The EU is a non-state entity ; in Schmitter 's language, it can best be described as a " consortio "( an entity in which there is a multitude of distinct @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ next) or even a " condominio "( an entity in which not only functional, but also territorial constituencies vary depending on the policy domain in question). # In such an entity, conceptions of democracy that assume a unified people, territory, and polity demarcated by the borders of the state are no longer appropriate. In order to democratize itself, the EU would have to come up with new types of democratic citizen rights and decision-making rules, which diverge from mechanisms used at the state level. # Existing theories of democracy have been devised for the state. Likewise, the citizens ' democratic socialization has occurred in state contexts. This has led to the dominance of state-based understandings of democracy. These understandings of democracy, however, are at odds with the institutions that would work for democratizing the EU. In other words, mechanisms that would be functionally appropriate to the EU risk not being recognized as " democratic " by citizens and academic observers alike. # The relationship that this argument establishes between @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. The EU, in Goodhart 's words, " is not the kind of thing that can be democratic on modern accounts of democracy. " 16 Again, optimistic versions of the argument exist, most prominently in contributions to deliberative democratic theory, 17 which insist that new understandings of democracy can develop over time. But even these positions agree that unless conceptions of democracy change, or the EU becomes a state, the idea of EU democracy is fraught with serious internal contradictions. # EU DEMOCRACY AND THE MEMBER STATES # What the State-centered Arguments Miss # All of the arguments surveyed in the preceding section come to the conclusion that the non-state character of the EU is a fundamental obstacle to its democratization. Their weakness, however, is that they all fall victim to what Kalypso Nicoladis has called the " tyranny of dichotomies " in debates over European integration.18 In their own way, each of the above arguments sets up a very clear-cut distinction between state and EU( read : non-state) contexts that overlooks how profoundly @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ For the first line of reasoning, the crucial dichotomy is between sovereign entities with Kompetenz-Kompetenz( that is, states) and non-sovereign entities without it( non-states). This distinction is exaggerated in two ways.19 First, the argument mistakenly assumes that polities in which the democratic criterion of popular sovereignty is fully realized--meaning that the citizens have legitimated the basic constitutional structure--are by necessity also sovereign in the sense of possessing unlimited Kompetenz-Kompetenz within the resulting constitutional system. This assumption is at the basis of the claim that the activation of EU citizens as democratic constitution makers, for instance by requiring that a democratic constitution of the EU be ratified in an EU-wide referendum, would automatically put the EU on the slippery slope toward sovereign statehood. Yet even if we agree that in an EU democracy, EU citizens would have to act as pouvoirs constituants, deciding about the initial division of powers between the EU and its member states, this tells us nothing about the pouvoirs constitus that control shifts of powers within the resulting constitutional system. In @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ could well establish the EU as a system with limited competences, where Kompetenz-Kompetenz rests with the citizens of the member states, so that their democratically elected parliaments or governments would have to agree to any extension of EU powers. # From the perspective of the sovereignty-based argument, it might be objected that what matters here is not so much the outcome of the constitutionalization process, but rather its agent : Even if democratic constitutionalization merely ratifies the existing division of powers, the fact that EU citizens have acted in the process means that the role of pouvoir constituant has shifted to the European level, and ultimate sovereignty resides there. This line of reasoning, however, only accentuates a second problem with the argument : its conception of omnipresent and indivisible sovereignty, which assumes that in multilevel systems, one political level--and its citizenry--must ultimately reign supreme. One only needs to look to federal systems to realize that this is not the case. Within a federal constitution, Kompetenz-Kompetenz is explicitly shared between the federation and its subunits, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ levels are ruled out.20 Interpreted from the vantage point of democratic theory, we can say that in such a system, the citizens of the federation and the citizens of the subunits exercise sovereignty jointly, and this might entail activities both as pouvoir constituant and pouvoir constitu. Even Carl Schmitt, an author who surely can not be accused of underestimating sovereignty and its political and constitutional importance, acknowledged that in a federation, attempts to unequivocally place sovereignty at one political level are inappropriate. " It is part of the character of a federation, " he wrote, " that the question of sovereignty between the federation and the subunits always remains open, as long as the federation as such exists alongside the subunits as such. " 21 There is no reason why federal-type arrangements should not be possible in the interaction between the EU and its member states. If this is acknowledged as a possibility, the argument that democratization of the EU, which would give EU citizens a stronger constitutional role at the European level, would @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ be upheld. # A similar kind of dichotomous thinking is evident in the second line of argument, which draws a distinction between entities that possess a demos( which have historically only been states), and entities that do not possess one( non-states). There are two problems here : First, it is difficult--if not impossible--to define precisely how strong a population 's common identities and feelings of solidarity must be in order to turn it into a demos. This does not undermine the general idea that democracy presupposes some sense of belonging on the part of citizens. However, the no-demos thesis provides no measurable standards with which to assess whether the forms of belonging that have developed in the EU are really too weak to make democracy work. Empirical research shows that many EU citizens do identify with Europe, even though national identities remain stronger and are more widely shared, and that a European public sphere is slowly developing through linkages between national institutions and publics.22 The social infrastructure on which democracy relies is therefore not completely @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is strong enough to sustain a form of democracy that operates exclusively at the EU level is a moot point. After all, and this is the second issue that is overlooked in the no-demos argument, the form of democracy that is taking shape in the EU is defined by the fact that it is operating at multiple levels. In this system, supranational democratic procedures, which can be said to require a European demos, are only one of three core channels of democratic input.23 In addition to this channel, citizen participation also occurs through domestic democratic processes in the member states, which rely on the national demoi and influence the EU 's intergovernmental procedures, and through transnational mechanisms such as interest group consultations, in which functionally defined sectoral demoi( for example, business owners, farmers, trade union members, environmentalists, etc.) can become active. It is difficult to imagine a workable strategy for further democratization that would not build on the continued existence of these multiple democratic channels. This structure implies, however @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ one demos, but in multiple demoi. The EU might hence be more adequately described as a " demoi-cracy " that is, in the words of Nicoladis, " predicated on the mutual recognition, confrontation, and ever more demanding sharing of our respective and separate identities--not on their merger. " 24 This implies that there is no prospect for an EU state, but also no need for the EU to become one, since its democracy will( have to) be based on a much weaker and more heterogeneous conception of demos than that which developed at the nation-state level. # This reasoning could be read as supporting the third position summarized above, which argues that the main problem in democratizing non-state entities lies in the fact that this democratization requires non-standard institutional mechanisms which are difficult to legitimate based on established democratic models. However, not one of the three existing democratic channels in the EU, if viewed by itself, consists of mechanisms that are fundamentally at odds with state-based democratic politics, and is unfamiliar to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for almost all proposals that have been made for the EU 's further democratization. The third argument hence exaggerates the differences between state-based democratic mechanisms and those realized in, or appropriate for, the EU as a non-state entity. It overlooks that, to a very significant extent, it is the state that provides the conceptual basis--and legitimacy--for EU institutions and procedures. # This is most obvious in the intergovernmental channel of EU democracy. This channel, which operates through domestic democratic processes and the cooperation of member-state governments at the EU level, especially in the Council, seeks to explicitly transfer the legitimacy of the member-states to the EU. We can call this a logic of derivation : The EU is democratic because--and as long as--it exercises its competences under the control of national democratic representatives ; EU institutions hence derive their legitimacy from the democratic legitimacy of the member states. In the supranational channel of EU democracy, a different type of legitimacy relationship between the EU and the state is established. This one relies not on procedural @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ legitimacy of supranational democratic institutions, such as the European Parliament, is justified by pointing out that they are structurally similar--or at least functionally equivalent--to state-level institutions. Here, it is precisely the state-like character of some EU institutions that is at the core of its legitimacy, both as an anchor of existing public support and as a foundation-stone to build on in making the EU more democratic.( This explains why proponents of a more supranational EU have sought to equip the EU with additional state-like imagery--flags, anthems, holidays, and the like.) # Neither the logic of derivation nor the logic of analogy necessarily results in positive assessments of the EU. First, both logics can be applied in arguments that see legitimacy deficits at the state level spill over into the EU realm, so that in effect the EU 's legitimacy is undermined. Second, there is also the possibility of applying the logics in a negative way, criticizing that relationships of derivation or analogy between the EU and the member states are all too strong @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ warnings of an EU " superstate, " which are grounded in the impression that the EU has become excessively state-like. For our purposes, it is not important precisely which legitimacy relationships between the EU and its member states are constructed in any particular context ; what matters is that such relationships are regularly established when the EU 's legitimacy is at issue in political or academic debates. This indicates that EU institutions can be evaluated from an explicitly state-based reference point ; the EU 's intergovernmental and supranational features are hence by no means unintelligible for observers accustomed to state-based politics. # The same is true for the EU 's nascent institutions of transnational democracy, which at present consist mainly of procedures for systematic consultation with organized civil society in the process of drawing up legislative initiatives.25 While these consultations, carried out primarily by the European Commission, have been described as more systematic and more institutionalized than similar procedures at the member-state level, the idea of lobbying by--and consultation of--major stakeholders is nothing that the citizens of the member states are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ that have been made to further invigorate transnational democracy, such as an extension and radicalization of the new European Citizens ' Initiative.26 While mechanisms of direct democracy are used to various extents in different member states, their popularity has grown significantly in recent decades, and it would be an exaggeration to argue that they are fundamentally at odds with established, state-based understandings of democracy. # This analysis casts doubt on the claim that state-based criteria of democracy are by their very nature " inadequate and inappropriate " for the EU, 27 and/or that the democratization of the EU requires the invention of new institutions that differ from those used at the state level. What is more, even proposals that do suggest innovative institutions are sometimes justified with reference to state-based politics. The clearest evidence of this is provided by Schmitter 's own ideas for making the EU more democratic, which include holding separate elections for the length of a representative 's term of office, granting multiple votes to child-rearing parents, or providing tax funding to semi-public interest groups @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of these proposals, according to Schmitter, is that democratic procedures at the EU level should be " as different as possible from national ones, " 28 so that citizens perceive some democratic " value added " provided by the EU. This reasoning can be described as a logic of complementarity in which the EU is legitimate precisely because it has political features, or achieves political results, that are absent in the member states. Like the logics of derivation and analogy, this logic grounds the legitimacy of EU institutions in an explicit comparison with institutions at the state level. Despite his concerns that democratic procedures diverging from the state model would not be seen as legitimate, Schmitter 's own democratization strategy thus banks on the opposite effect, namely, that citizens would view unconventional procedures at the EU level as a useful addition to the more conventional ones established in the member states. # Two conclusions can be drawn from these considerations. First, there is no convincing evidence that the EU 's non-state character presents insurmountable obstacles @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ be constructed to claim that only states can be fully democratic withstands scrutiny, at least when applied to the EU. One reason for this--and this is the second conclusion--is that the EU is not usefully described as a case of " democracy beyond the state " in the first place. The EU and its member states are so intimately interwoven that the EU is better described as an emerging and incomplete " democracy with the state, " an entity that, while not itself a state, draws extensively on the state in its constitutional structure and democratic institutions, as well as legitimation practices. # DEMOCRATIZING EU GOVERNANCE # Where the Real Challenge Lies # These conclusions bring up two further questions, pointing in different analytical directions. The first is of interest primarily to students of the EU : If it is not its non-state character, what is the reason for the difficulties that the EU has experienced in its democratization? The second question focuses on the applicability of the above arguments beyond the EU : Are they more restricted @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ other cases conventionally discussed as " democracy beyond the state " as well? This section will focus on answering the first question, while the second question will be addressed in the concluding paragraphs. # As the preceding section has shown, the difficulties in democratizing the EU are not due to the lack of channels for democratic input. The EU presently has three main democratic channels--supranational, intergovernmental, and transnational--and all of them can, in principle, influence the outcome of EU decision making. This multichannel structure reflects realities in European society, in which political problems( and the ensuing policy responses) affect different subgroups of the population--all Europeans, the citizens of specific member states, or functional subgroups of the EU population--and in which the citizens possess variegated allegiances to demoi of different encompassingness and at multiple political levels. # Why, then, does this system not currently provide the desired level of democratic accountability? Two factors are of central importance here : the first has to do with the EU 's institutional design, the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ become politicized among EU citizens. With respect to institutional design, the crucial problem lies in the interconnection--or " coupling " --between the three channels of democratic input.29 Such coupling is a regular feature in multilevel systems ; it is often impossible to determine in which channel of political input a problem should be dealt with, either because a problem concerns multiple constituencies( or demoi) at the same time, or because there is an incongruence between the constituency affected by the problem and the demos that commands citizens ' loyalty, solidarity, and engagement.( The latter problem has been evident in the Eurozone financial crisis. The crisis has shown that while financial imbalances within and between the Euro states have effects on all Europeans, as well as on sectoral communities such as banks, most EU citizens consider fiscal policy an area that is appropriately decided at the member-state level, whereas the influence of the EU and sectoral policy communities is resented. In other words, the real-world community affected by a problem and the imagined community that @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ identical.) # Whenever a political problem concerns more than one demos, democratic multilevel systems have to make decisions in a way that engages multiple democratic channels, and then combines their input into one final decision. The democratic problems of the EU derive to a significant extent from the specific system it has devised to provide for such inter-channel linkage. This system has been described as " loose coupling " ; 30 it is characterized by an informal and flexible cascade of consensus-oriented negotiations between member-state and EU politicians and bureaucrats. Contentious political issues in the EU go through multiple rounds of bilateral and multilateral consultations between member states as well as " trilogues " involving representatives from the European Parliament, the Council, and the European Commission, in which mutually acceptable solutions are hammered out. In contrast to systems of " tight coupling " in many federations, which are characterized by more formalized conciliation procedures( for instance between two legislative chambers), this system provides for relatively efficient policymaking. Its downside, however, lies in its @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the EU 's " loose coupling " that makes it difficult for the citizens to follow what is going on, to participate in a meaningful way by exerting outside pressure on the negotiations, and to hold decision makers to account after an agreement has been reached. # In other words, while the challenge of coupling of various democratic channels exists in all multilevel systems, 32 the problem with the institutional solution found in the EU is that it one-sidedly privileges efficiency over accountability, and elite negotiation over citizen participation. As a result, the citizens ' democratic input--be it in the form of electoral participation( at the European and national level) or through civil society--never translates directly into specific political outputs. This problem is not rooted in the EU 's non-state character ; it could in principle be addressed institutionally by reforming the mechanisms of inter-channel coupling. Proposals for such reforms have been widely discussed in the academic literature ; most of them do not diverge radically from institutions of state-based democracy. They include disentangling, as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ EU institutions and political levels to reduce the need for coupling in the first place, 33 increasing the transparency of intergovernmental and inter-institutional negotiations and providing for more parliamentary oversight, 34 as well as introducing mechanisms of direct democracy as additional participation and accountability devices.35 # It is clear that all of these democratization measures would come at a price of reduced effectiveness. This is why they tend to be viewed skeptically by many politicians. It is less obvious, however, why there has not been a more pronounced " democracy movement " in the European citizenry pushing for such reforms. To understand this lack of societal pressure for institutional reform, we must examine the ways in which citizens engage politically with the EU. Research has shown that over the past decades, a remarkable " politicization " of European integration has occurred, meaning that the EU has gained saliency in citizens ' political opinions and discourses. 36 However, this politicization is shaped by the fact that citizens ' knowledge about EU institutions and processes remains fragmentary. Citizen @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and ill-informed ; they concern general issues such as the benefits and costs of membership or questions of enlargement much more than the EU 's day-to-day activities. # This pattern of " uninformed politicization " also influences how citizens discuss the question of democracy in the EU. In a series of focus groups that my research team recently conducted in four EU member states, the majority of participants complained quite vocally about a lack of democracy in the EU.37 However, they did not define this " democratic deficit " in institutional terms ; what was expressed was rather a much more diffuse, yet also much more fundamental feeling of disenfranchisement, a sense of being ruled by an organization about which one knows far too little and which appears remote and inaccessible. In this framing, it is by no means self-evident that institutional reform is a solution to the EU 's democratic problems. In our focus groups, many of the participants who complained about the lack of democracy were also highly skeptical of proposals to bring about democratization, inasmuch as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ EU institutions that they viewed with suspicion. # The result is a vicious circle : The perception of the EU as inaccessible discourages citizens from becoming more engaged, which in turn encourages EU-level decision makers to stick to existing practices of " loose coupling, " which make the EU appear so inaccessible in the first place. The democratic deficit of the EU, in other words, is institutionally derived, but its persistence can be explained by the attitudes and perceptions of European citizens. This combination of problems is not rooted in the non-state character of the EU. The institutional sources of the democratic deficit lie in the EU 's peculiar system of " loose coupling " between various democratic channels ; they are not an unavoidable consequence of the EU 's nature as a system of divided sovereignty. The lack of citizen pressure for institutional democratization reflects a lack of knowledge about the EU ; it does not indicate that citizens do not consider the EU politically salient, do not form opinions about European affairs, or do not treat @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ' lack of knowledge about European affairs, finally, is probably best explained as a legacy of neofunctionalist integration strategies, which for decades sought to actively demobilize citizens ; 38 it does not derive from the fact that the EU 's complex institutional system necessarily exceeds the cognitive capacities of citizens socialized in state-based democratic contexts. # Viewed in this light, democratization of the EU is not a matter of turning a non-state entity into a state, but ultimately one of institutional design, coupled with explicit attempts at politically educating and mobilizing the citizens. It requires activities not only by EU institutions, but also by the member states, whose communication channels and educational institutions are indispensable if Europeans are to become more competent multilevel citizens. This is of course much easier said than done, especially given the fact that political leaders and elites at the EU and member-state levels have a limited desire for more active and informed citizen participation in EU politics. Still, we can conclude that the EU 's non-state character implies no insurmountable obstacles @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a question of political will. # DEMOCRACY AND THE STATE # Where Do We Go From Here? # Based on the considerations presented so far, it is clear that there is no necessary connection between the EU 's lack of statehood and its deficit in democracy. While the EU has experienced significant problems in its democratization, these problems can in principle be overcome without turning the EU into a state. The question that remains is whether these findings are peculiar to the EU as a system of( incomplete and/or emerging) " democracy with the state, " or whether they can be generalized to other non-state constellations, such as international organizations more generally, transnational networks, or perhaps even private actors such as multinational business corporations. # Two arguments are relevant for answering this question. On the one hand, the peculiarities of the EU construction, if compared to other institutions involved in global governance, should not be underestimated. A number of specific features of the EU system make it an unusually fertile ground for @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ These features include the strong role of the member states and their democratic institutions in governance at the EU level, the sophisticated--and in many respects **25;11696;TOOLONG architecture of the EU, the( gradual) emergence of European identities in the population, as well as the density of transnational connections across member states. All these features make it particularly likely that legitimacy relationships between EU governance and democratic practices at the member-state level--constructed according to the logics of derivation, analogy, and possibly complementarity--can be established. # On the other hand, at least some of the arguments made in this article do not apply to the EU alone. Most importantly, the insights that democracy is not conceptually tied to polities that possess unlimited sovereignty and that it can, with appropriate institutional design, also be realized in entities whose demos is less cohesive than that of the nation, are certainly valuable for other non-state entities in global politics. The same is true for the observation that political institutions and practices in entities seemingly " beyond the state " are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ citizens accustomed to state-based politics. Even outside of the EU, internationalization processes involve mostly a " diffusion " of governance responsibilities rather than an outright shift of responsibilities away from the state.39 As a result, many activities that used to be monopolized by the state are now exercised jointly by the state and various international actors, but states retain a crucial role in the process, and often shape the policies of international actors from the inside. There are, in other words, fewer instances of governance that is truly " beyond the state " than is often assumed. The analysis above demonstrates that this reduces the conceptual and practical difficulties of transferring democratic institutions first established at the state level. # All of this does not imply that the democratization of world politics is easy. Even in the EU, with its relatively favorable context, the level of democratization that could thus far be achieved remains insufficient. The experience of the EU suggests that the democratization of global governance presupposes not only the right kind of institutional design--one @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ also requires the education and mobilization of the citizens. This is an ambitious objective. The claim that democracy presupposes a state, however, erects artificial barriers that make a difficult task appear impossible. # 1 Philippe C. Schmitter and Terry Lynn Karl, " What Democracy Is? And Is Not, " Journal of Democracy 2( Summer 1991) : 75-88, at 76. # 2 Joseph H. H. Weiler, " The Geology of International Law : Governance, Democracy, and Legitimacy, " Zeitschrift fr auslndisches ffentliches Recht und Verwaltungsrecht 64( Summer 2004) : 547-562 ; Grinne de Brca, " Developing Democracy beyond the State, " Columbia Journal of Transnational Law 46( 2008) : 221-278.3 Michael T. Greven and Louis W. Pauly, eds., Democracy beyond the State : The European Dilemma and the Emerging Global Order( Lanham : Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2000) ; Michael Zrn, " Democratic Governance beyond the Nation-State : The EU and Other International Institutions, " European Journal of International Relations 6( June 2000 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the Democratic Deficit : Reassessing Legitimacy in the European Union, " Journal of Common Market Studies 40( November 2002) : 603-624.5 Giandomenico Majone, " Europe 's ' Democratic Deficit ' : The Question of Standards, " European Law Journal 4( March 1998) : 5-28.6 Andreas Fllesdal and Simon Hix, " Why There Is a Democratic Deficit in the EU : A Response to Majone and Moravcsik, " Journal of Common Market Studies 44( May 2006) : 533-562 ; Simon Hix, What 's Wrong with the European Union and How to Fix It( Cambridge : Polity Press, 2008).7 Arthur Benz, Der moderne Staat : Grundlagen der politologischen Analyse, 2d ed.( Munich : Oldenbourg, 2008) ; Christopher Pierson, The Modern State, 3d ed.( London : Routledge, 2011). In contrast to these authors, my definition excludes the aspects of democracy and constitutionalism, which are often considered core elements of the normative idea of modern statehood, but whose absence generally does not @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Grimm, " Does Europe Need a Constitution? " European Law Journal 1( November 1995) : 282-302 ; Dieter Grimm, " Constitutionalism beyond the Nation State " in Stefan Voigt and Hans Jrgen Wagener, eds., Constitutions, Markets and Law : Recent Experiences in Transition Economies( Cheltenham : Edward Elgar, 2002) : 317-323. See also Olaf Asbach, " Verfassung und Demokratie in der Europischen Union : Zur Kritik der Debatte um eine Konstitutionalisierung Europas, " Leviathan 30( June 2002) : 267-297 ; Carsten A. Gnther, " Der Verfassungsvertrag : Ein Modell fr die Europische Union? " Zeitschrift fr Parlamentsfragen 33( June 2002) : 347-360.9 Grimm, " Does Europe Need a Constitution? " 299.10 Georg Jellinek, Allgemeine Staatslehre, 3d ed.( Berlin : Hring Verlag, 1912), 496-504.11 Asbach, " Verfassung und Demokratie " ; Gnther, " Der Verfassungsvertrag. " 12 Claus Offe, " Is There, Or Can There Be, a ' European Society " ' in Ines Katenhusen and Wolfram @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ der Europischen Integration auf Institutionenwandel und neue Konturen des demokratischen Verfassungsstaates( Opladen : Leske+Budrich, 2003), 71-89 ; Stefano Bartolini, Restructuring Europe : Centre Formation, System Building, and Political Structuring between the Nation State and the European Union( Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2005).13 Offe, " European Society, " 73-74.14 Jrgen Habermas, Time of Transitions( Cambridge : Polity Press, 2006), 89-110.15 Philippe C. Schmitter, How to Democratize the European Union? And Why Bother?( Lanham, MD : Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1999), especially 10-19 ; Michael Goodhart, " Europe 's Democratic Deficits through the Looking Glass : The European Union as a Challenge for Democracy, " Perspectives on Politics 5( September 2007) : 567-584.16 Goodhart, " Europe 's Democratic Deficits, " 575.17 Erik O. Eriksen and John Erik Fossum, eds., Democracy in the European Union : Integration through Deliberation?( London : Routledge, 2000) ; Erik O. Erikson, The Unfinished Democratization of Europe( Oxford @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, " The New Constitution as European ' Demoi-cracy '? " Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 7( Spring 2004) : 76-93.19 Vivien Schmidt, Democracy in Europe : The EU and National Polities( Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2006), 8-29.20 In the EU, some first steps toward such a division of sovereignty have already been taken : Once the member states have delegated decision-making powers to the EU, they have lost full Kompetenz-Kompetenz, since clawing back the delegated powers would require unanimous agreement of all member states.21 Carl Schmitt, Verfassungslehre( Munich : Duncker &amp; Humblot, 1928), 373. Translation by the author.22 Thomas Risse, A Community of Europeans? Transnational Identities and Public Spheres( Ithaca, NY : Cornell University Press, 2010).23 Achim Hurrelmann and Joan DeBardeleben, " Democratic Dilemmas in EU Multilevel Governance : Untangling the Gordian Knot, " European Political Science Review 1( July 2009) : 229-247.24 Nicoladis, " The New Constitution, " 84. On the concept of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the European Union : Towards the Deterritorialization of Democracy " in Samantha Besson and Jos Luis Mart, eds., Deliberative Democracy and its Discontents( Aldershot : Ashgate, 2006) : 181-214 ; James Bohman, Democracy across Borders : From Dmos to Dmoi( Cambridge : MIT Press, 2007) ; Francis Cheneval and Frank Schimmelfennig, " The Case for Demoicracy in the European Union " Journal of Common Market Studies 51( March 2013) : 334-350.25 Justin Greenwood, Interest Representation in the European Union( Basingstoke : Palgrave Macmillan, 2007) ; Beate Kohler-Koch and Christine Quittkat, De-Mystification of Participatory Democracy : EU Governance and Civil Society( Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2013).26 Yannis Papadopoulos, " Implementing( and Radicalizing) Art. I-47.4 of the Constitution : Is the Addition of Some( Semi-) Direct Democracy to the Nascent Consociational European Federation just Swiss Folklore? " Journal of European Public Policy 12( July 2005) : 448-467.27 Goodhart, " Europe 's Democratic Deficits, " 578.28 Schmitter, How @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, " Democratic Dilemmas, " 238-240.30 Arthur Benz, " The European Union as a Loosely Coupled Multi-level System " in Henrik Enderlein, Sonja Wlti, and Michael Zrn, eds., Handbook on Multi-level Governance( Cheltenham : Edward Elgar, 2011), 214-226.31 Arthur Benz, " Compounded Representation in EU Multi-Level Governance " in Beate Kohler-Koch, ed., Linking EU and National Governance( Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2003), 82-110 ; Arthur Benz, " Policy-Making and Accountability in EU Multilevel Governance " in Arthur Benz and Yannis Papadopoulos, eds., Governance and Democracy : Comparing National, European and Transnational Experiences( London : Routledge, 2006), 99-114.32 Jennifer Smith, " Federalism and Democratic Accountability " in Joan DeBardeleben and Achim Hurrelmann, eds., Democratic Dilemmas of Multilevel Governance : Legitimacy, Representation and Accountability in the European Union( Basingstoke : Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), 38-58.33 Benz, " Policy-Making and Accountability. " 34 Hix, What 's Wrong with the European Union.35 Heidrun Abromeit, Democracy in Europe @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ : Berghahn, 1998) ; Papadopoulos, " Implementing( and Radicalizing) Art. I-47.4 ".36 Liesbeth Hooghe and Gary Marks, " A Postfunctionalist Theory of European Integration : From Permissive Consensus to Constraining Dissensus, " British Journal of Political Science 39( January 2009) : 1-23 ; Pieter de Wilde and Michael Zrn, " Can the Politicization of European Integration be Reversed? " Journal of Common Market Studies 50, Supplement S1( March 2012) : 137-153.37 Achim Hurrelmann, Anna Gora, and Andrea Wagner, " The Politicization of European Integration : More than an Elite Affair? " Political Studies, Early View Publication, DOI : 10.1111/1467-9248.12090( 2013).38 Giandomenico Majone, Dilemmas of European Integration : The Ambiguities and Pitfalls of Integration by Stealth( Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2005).39 Achim Hurrelmann, Stephan Leibfried, Kerstin Martens, and Peter Mayer, eds., Transforming the Golden-Age Nation State( Basingstoke : Palgrave Macmillan, 2007). TABLE 1 State and Non-State Features of the EU # 
