4159441 When I was a graduate student, my big dream was to be published in Research and Practice for Persons With Severe Disabilities( RPSD ; formerly The Journal of The Association for the Severely Handicapped) ; serving as its editor was inconceivable to me at that time. Anyway, the rest is history, and it is time for me to end my role as editor and following tradition make some parting comments. Serving as an editor has been one of the most enjoyable and satisfying professional experiences I have had, and I have many individuals to thank for their support and assistance. First, let me thank all the associate editors who have served with me, most of whom for the long haul( 7 years) : Susan Copeland, Stacy Dymond, Diane Ferguson, Phil Ferguson, Carolyn Hughes, Rachel Janney, Donna Lehr, John McDonnell, Craig Michaels, Roberta Schnorr, Karrie Shogren, Marti Snell, Fred Spooner, and David Westling. Let me also thank my colleague Suzanne Young who served as our statistical consultant and my department head, Mary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ let me express my sincere appreciation to all the 60+ members of our editorial board. Without their great knowledge, insight, and commitment to TASH 's research mission, this journal would never have achieved its first tier status and professional reputation. Finally, I must express my thanks to my managing editor Eirin Grimes( how she put up with me over all these years continues to amaze me). Eirin is a counselor at the University of Wyoming and deals with many serious student problems each day, but she came to every one of our weekly meetings in the best cheer. Every meeting we had was enjoyable, despite all the problems we faced : switching to an electronic review system, delayed publication dates, missing reviews and galley proofs, change of publisher, and lack of accepted manuscripts, among others. My appreciation is heartfelt. # I must also thank Barb Trader, the TASH Board of Directors, and the four presidents we had during my tenure as editor : Lyle Romer, Carol Quirk, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ encouragement. No doubt I made decisions and took actions they may not have agreed with, but I never felt their lack of support. I believe that the journal serves an important and valued function, and all these individuals helped to achieve this function. # So what has happened with the journal in the last 7 years? Most notably in terms of operations, the journal has finally entered the " Digital Age. " All manuscripts now are electronically submitted and reviewed via Manuscript Central. This has allowed for a rapid and efficient review system. We also have changed publishers and RPSD is now being published by SAGE Publications. We look forward to SAGE 's commitment to better market and publicize the journal and to help achieve a greater readership, both nationally and internationally. # Probably, the biggest and most desirable changeat least from my perspectivehas been a threefold increase in manuscript submissions ; this has resulted in an increase in associate editors from five to eight members. This increase is of course important because it provides @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the bane of many RPSD editors has been to have a sufficient number of accepted articles to publish. But, more importantly, this increase provides evidence that the journal has regained its credibility in the research communitya status it had all but lost prior to my appointment, and that researchers now feel that RPSD is a first tier and respected journal. Last, our citation index has correspondingly increased threefold, which provides further evidence that we are " respected " in the professional community. # The journal has thoughtfully and respectfully addressed and discussed every issue relevant to ensuring that people with severe disabilities are entitled to full recognition and the opportunity to learn and to lead meaningful and productive lives. Broadly speaking, the articles addressed 25 different topical areas or issues( e.g., inclusive practice, positive behavior support). Interestingly, the five most frequently addressed topics were access to the general curriculum, literacy, transition, customized employment, and diversity. No effort will be made to identify a pattern, but these data do @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ groups and situations. # As would be unexpected, given the diversity of opinion in the TASH community, several articles in RPSD have engendered controversy( e.g., facilitated communication, the Special Olympics). No doubt these articles created some tension and may have polarized opinions among TASH members about these issues. That said, I do not believe that these differences in opinion about TASH policies and priorities are a cause for alarm but are a reminder about how complicated are many issues we deal with, how heartfelt are our opinions about varying issues, and how research and values may sometimes appear to be at odds, even when similar outcomes are sought by disagreeing parties( 1). Serving in this mediating role and opening up conversations about controversial issues is an important responsibility for a research journal, and it is one that the journal has endeavored to achieve. As 2 noted, historically TASH has applauded research that is scientifically valid and socially relevant, and the journal has sought to be responsive to that call. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ function) is that it not only publishes current research but also serves as a change agent for guaranteeing equal rights and social justice. Rather than being seen as just a publication of interest to researchers, graduate students, and academicians, the journal is perceived as a source of thoughtful and reasoned information for various stakeholders( e.g., educators, politicians, parents) who, hopefully, will use it to advocate for and affect change. This is of course a goal difficult to measure, but I am hopeful that the journal has helped to inform stakeholders about best practices and needed changes in the practices we use and the policies we follow. Since TASH 's conception 40 years ago, much has been accomplished across diverse areas( e.g., education, employment, community living), but there is much more to achieve : full inclusion for all students, full participation as citizens in their communities, meaningful and productive employment, a higher quality of life and overall well-being, a greater respect for and attention to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, among other goals. I am confident that in the future, RPSD will continue to serve its role in helping these goals to be realized. # Every year, we honor a reviewer with the TASH Distinguished Reviewer of the Year Award. It is almost fateful that the recipient of that award during my first year as editor was Stacy Dymond, who will be the new editor of RPSD. Stacy has a deep knowledge about research, has been an active contributor to the journal, has had a variety of editorial responsibilities, and has an unswerving commitment to serving people with severe disabilities. I am confident that she will both improve the quality of the journal and allow it to achieve greater recognition. # I have been very honored and humbled to serve as the RPSD editor and, in an indirect way, to encourage and support the research mission of TASH. I thank you all for providing me with this opportunity. 
