4022941 It is hard to overemphasize how politically sensitive religious education is in Turkish society. The debate over religious education, along with a few other touchstone issues, reveals much about how official conceptions of religion clash with the beliefs and practices of many religiously observant Turkish citizens. This clash became particularly clear to me as I became involved in an independent and unauthorized women 's Koran course in Sincan, a suburb of Ankara. I participated in this course in order to understand conservative religious lifestyles in Turkey, and to gain insight into the view of secularism that many pious Muslims held in Turkish society soon after the collapse of the Islamist-leaning government in 1997. The involvement in the Koran course certainly allowed me to carry out this research, but also gave me an interesting perspective from which to examine the politicization of religious knowledge and education at a rather turbulent time in Turkey 's economic and political history. To appreciate the political importance and sensitivity of religious instruction, it is necessary to understand the nature of secularism in Turkey and most especially the relationship between the Turkish state and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ especially since the fall of the Ottoman Empire and the foundation of the modern Turkish republic in 1923, Turkey 's government and major social institutions have been staunchly secular. The early Republican government, led by Mustafa Kemal Atatrk, saw secularization as essential to the creation of a truly modern nation-state. Indeed, Kemalism( the ideology based on the doctrines of Mustafa Kemal) promotes what it considers to be secularism, along with nationalism, economic development and Westernization, as the ideological basis of the modern Turkish Republic. Many aspects of Turkish society--from education and governance to the organization of daily life--were officially secularized over a relatively short period of time. However, Turkish secularism more closely resembles French laicit than American-style secularism. Where secularism in the United States strives for a complete separation of church and state, laicism( laiklik) in Turkey strives to bring religion under the control of the state. The idea is that religion should not be in the hands of a powerful and independent cleric elite( ulema) that can rival @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the non-religious state, where it no longer poses a potential threat to government hegemony( Davison 2003:341 ; White 2002:4). As such, Turkish secularism--or laicism--does not make assumptions of religious neutrality or objectivity in the public sphere, but instead religion is tightly defined and legally subordinated to the political establishment. Religion is controlled by a branch of government, the Directorate of Religious Affairs, whose main task, according to the 1982 Turkish constitution, is to regulate Islam, especially its public expressions, such that it guarantees that these expressions accord with the needs of the state( Yavuz 2000:29 ; Yilmaz 2005:388). Controlling religious education is, of course, an essential method of " domesticating " religion and guaranteeing that it remains relatively harmless. Over the course of the Westernizing reforms in the 19th-century Ottoman Empire, education became more and more secular( Mardin 1993:350-353). Since the founding of the modern Turkish republic in 1923, compulsory general education has been secular, ending once and for all the influences of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Republican government put all education under the control of the Ministry of Education, developing a unified curriculum and educational system that would articulate a particular cultural and moral identity--a Turkish identity--to be shared by the( Turkish) citizens of the new nation( Kaplan 2006:39). This identity included a very particular interpretation of Islam that was encoded in official religious educational practices and institutions, while alternative interpretations were condemned and often declared illegal by the Turkish government. Yet many members of Turkish society have found the government treatment of religion in education to be problematic for many reasons that I will explore in this paper, and they have attempted to establish alternative forms of religious education outside the official channels. The Sincan Koran course is an example of one such alternative mode of religious education. I will examine some of the course participants ' attitudes toward certain education policies, such as the restriction on headscarves in schools, but I will focus especially on their attitudes toward state-sanctioned religious education. This includes the religion courses required in all primary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ geared toward creating religious officials), and the state-run Koran courses. While the participants in general did not object to the existence of these educational opportunities, they saw them as fundamentally flawed since these forms of education rested on an interpretation of Islam that differed strikingly from their own interpretations. That is, the Turkish state promotes the notion that Islam can be separated out from other types of social activities, including politics, to create a neutral, non-religious public space and institutions. In the case of Turkey, a " secular " public sphere is one in which religious symbols and practices--except for those sanctioned by the state itself-are prohibited. Thus, the state may proscribe such lifestyle choices as wearing Muslim headscarves and clothing in public spaces, praying in unauthorized places such as in public schools, and participating in unofficial religious education. Such an interpretation of Islam rests on several connected assumptions that the Koran course participants found problematic, sometimes even distressful. The first assumption is that there is one essential, apolitical Islam that @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @( n1) Other religious practices are deemed political and in violation of the secular status quo that supposedly characterizes the Turkish public sphere. The state, especially the military and judiciary, has established itself as a protector of laicism, and therefore has the right to limit these practices in the public sphere. The state can claim that religious freedom is maintained because they are not necessarily condemning these practices all together, but are simply excluding them from the public realm. The practices may be performed in the privacy of the family home or to some extent in designated( and state-controlled) places of worship, so that they do " no harm, " that is, present no danger to the political status quo. This notion rests on yet two more assumptions that are also bound up in the official interpretation of religion 's role in society. One assumption is that this official " essential " Islam is defined primarily by a particular belief or faith, whereas religious practice--especially certain practices that violate the Republican state 's definition @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ without harm to the practitioner or to Islam itself. As Ihsan Yilmaz puts it( 2005:392), " In Republican epistemology, religion is imprisoned in the conscience of the individual and in places of worship in society and is not allowed to mix with and interfere in public life. " In a word, there is a " Protestantization " of Islam among many Kemalist Turks and in official attitudes toward religious practice and education. The official line goes something like this : religious belief is something of the heart, something that one accepts, and belief or faith is the essence of religion. Faith trumps " works, " belief is more important than deed. As such, Kemalists may claim, as many have, that it is not necessary to wear a Muslim headscarf, refrain from alcohol or pray five times a day to be a " true " Muslim. Talal Asad( 1993,2003) has commented on the Protestant bias in Western and anthropological understandings of religion and the problems such a bias creates in analyses @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Construction of Religion as an Anthropological Category, " Asad critiques Clifford Geertz 's famous definition of religion( 1973) for its cognitivist slant( see also Bell 1992). That is, Geertz 's definition of religion has construed it as being about the moods and motivations of individuals ; religion is primarily symbolic and cognitive and it only secondarily concerns actual practice. As such, many religious actions may be optional, excluded without any " real " harm to the essence of religion, namely, individual private belief. In Turkey, as exemplified in the experiences of the Koran course participants, pious Muslims are expected to leave certain practices at home when they venture into the public sphere and into public educational institutions. The veil may be shed without harming a woman 's " true "( essential) Muslim identity. Only certain types of religious knowledge may be promulgated in the public sphere, while others must be kept inside the privacy of the home where it " belongs. " Asad( 2003) has also illuminated @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ depends on conceptions of secularism and the public sphere that are highly problematic, especially in non-European societies.( n2) The common supposition in Western liberal political theory is that secularism creates a neutral or objective arena--the public sphere--that allows for people to agree to disagree about religion. Certainly, in the United States the conception of secularism is one in which the state is to have no large role in American religion at both the institutional and personal practitioner 's level. The government and public sphere are supposed to be neutral toward religions and remain outside the realm of religious activity. In this conception, the secular public sphere operates on a tenet of what Charles Taylor( 1988) calls " overlapping consensus, " where people with different religious viewpoints and motives may subscribe to the same set of political principles. Conflicts that arise over what those political principles may be are resolved through negotiation and compromise. Asad( 2003) takes issue with this notion of the secular as a neutral public arena in which certain " supra-religious " norms @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a process of give and take among equals, but most often the parties negotiating over what principles dominate in a secular society are not equals. More commonly, " negotiation amounts to the exchange of unequal concessions in situations where the weaker party has no choice "( Asad 2003:6). The result of such power relationships is that over time, the realm of " the secular " is carved out by those with power, a process that excludes many who have little or no political voice. In this analysis, the secular public sphere can hardly be called a neutral or objective arena of public interaction. In the case of Turkey, the Kemalist state has determined what types of religious activity are permissible in public spaces and what are not, supposedly in the interests of maintaining a laicist public sphere. But by placing these limitations on " autonomous Islamic practices "( Cinar 2005:18), the state also claims authority over what many people-including the Koran course students-considered to be private lifestyle issues, such as decisions about @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ In a word, the state has not only defined the nature of the public sphere in a restrictive way, but has labeled " public " those things that others see as corresponding to the " private " sphere or to the freedom of choice about private concerns. Moreover, the Turkish republican regime casts its restrictions on autonomous religious practice as a matter of national security. For most staunch Kemalists, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Afghanistan under the Taliban serve as frightening examples of what happens when Islam gets mixed up in or takes over public institutions : religious authoritarianism and repression automatically result. They can claim that by limiting autonomous Islamic practices, they are only working in Turkey 's best interests, thereby justifying the use of force to defend its particular version of Islam. For the students in the Koran course and others like them, the questions of the definition of religion and the nature of the public sphere were not merely theoretical. The tensions between the state 's and the students ' understandings of religion affected @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ They have seen first-hand how some violations of the state interpretation of Islam have led to strong reactions from legal and law enforcement institutions. Women in headscarves( including several of the Koran course participants) have been banned from public institutions, such as universities, schools, courtrooms, and even the parliament( Shively 2005). Some have been detained and questioned by state security personnel. Teachers who are caught straying from the state religious education curriculum may lose their jobs. Public officials and others who wander too far from official Islam have been fined, jailed or barred from politics on charges of irtica( " reactionary politics "), blclk( separatism), or of " insulting Turkishness. "( n3) For those Muslims who find fault with the state 's interpretation of Islam and wish to develop practices and lifestyles they see as being more in accord with the will of God, often the only option is to participate in the many " underground "( illegal, unauthorized) courses or organizations that teaches a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ will highlight one such course and the attitudes and ideas of the women who participated in it.The People and Place The Sincan Koran course was led by a charismatic, intelligent and articulate woman whom I will call Meryem. She was very young( 19 years old) at the beginning of my fieldwork and had only completed the then-mandatory fifth grade public school education. Instead of proceeding on to middle school, she had entered a relatively rigorous two-year Koran study course in a residential program offered by a religious organization her family had belonged to( see below). She had no formal education beyond this but was serious in her self-study. When I first visited her home, I was surprised to see several shelves of hefty religious books in the sitting room--books are relatively uncommon in lower middle class families, such as her own. She reported that she had read all the books when I asked her about them, and over the course of my fieldwork, I would often see her take down a volume to study or @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, as well as her ability to discuss or speak about almost any religious topic, gained her neighborhood reputation as a young woman who is knowledgeable about the Koran and Islamic law and practices. She had in fact worked as a sort of preacher at a local religious radio station two years before I first met her, when she was only 17. I first met Meryem and her mother, Hatice, in 1998 in their lower middle-class home in Sincan, a religiously conservative provincial city just northwest of Ankara. Much of that first conversation was geared toward informing me about what Meryem thought were basic principles of Islam in Turkey and her opinions about certain political issues that were raging in the Turkish press at the time, most especially issues regarding education and the tesettr, a form of Muslim women 's dress that is viewed with much suspicion by the Kemalist establishment.( n4) She also mentioned that she was the hoca( teacher) of a daily women 's Koran course in Sincan. The group followed a fairly @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ every day, five days a week, to pursue several aspects of religious study. They would study spoken and written Arabic and spend almost half of the class memorizing and reciting passages from the Koran assigned by Meryem. After the recitations, Meryem would most often give a sohbet( a sermon) based on the day 's Koran passages. Other times Meryem and the students would discuss other aspects of Islamic belief and practice, such as the life of the Prophet Muhammad( siyer) or the lives of the other prophets and prominent philosophers and saints in Muslim history. The class would usually end with glasses of tea and further discussion of the religious topics or, more often, the participants would turn to political subjects. To my delight, Meryem asked me to join the class as much as I could. Over the next year I participated in the course once or twice a week and joined in other neighborhood activities, such as political rallies, speeches, religious meetings and community discussion groups. This course @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for participant observation fieldwork on how the political issues swirling around Islam in Turkey were experienced in the everyday life of religiously observant women( cf. Gle 1996, zdalga 1998, Saktanber 2002). The Koran course was designed for like-minded women in the neighborhood who for various reasons chose not to participate in official, state-run Koran courses. These women were generally young and only a few were married with children, though the membership of the group varied considerably while I was there. Most of the students came from lower middle-class immigrant families that populated the area of Sincan they inhabited. The educational situation of the students varied : some only had rudimentary formal education, some had graduated from primary school, some from high school, and occasionally a small number of college students took part in the course as well. As such, the course attracted women from many different backgrounds who shared an interest in deepening their knowledge of and devotion to the principles of Islam. They all wore the tesettr, which marked them off as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Meryem herself was the eldest child in a family of immigrants from the Black Sea region to the Ankara area. The populations of all the major cities in Turkey have swelled in recent decades with rural-to-urban migrants seeking work and better living conditions. These are the inhabitants of the varos, the proverbial immigrant neighborhood-suburb, which Jenny White( 2002:59) describes as " the urban location of a set of characteristics--poverty, rural origin, Muslim lifestyle, veiling, patriarchy. " These characteristics stand in contrast to the dominant Turkish notions of modernity, " characterized by middle-class, urban values and lifestyles, secular clothing and the autonomous individual. " The varos, " infect " the modern city, in Kemalist eyes, with a cultural pollution of " backwardness. " Meryem 's family--as well as the other students and much of Sincan--is varos, part of this wave of migrants who have managed to create a comfortable home in the city, while rejecting some of the Kemalist ideals traditionally associated with city life in Turkey. Over the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ become more firmly established in the cities and has experienced some upward socio-economic mobility, the lifestyles and religious identity associated with them has gained some degree of social capital. Especially since the moderately Islamic Justice and Development Party( AKP) gained political dominance in 2002, all of the signs of Islamic identity have become more and more associated with a prosperous middle-class throughout Turkey. Indeed, the Kemalists make up a minority in Turkish society and their dominance is ebbing, as demonstrated by the growing popularity of the AKP( White 2007). But since the Kemalists have had the upper hand in Turkey 's most powerful institutions--especially in the military and the judiciary--their views have dominated Turkish political discourse. Sincan itself had( and still has) a notoriety among Kemalists for being religiously " conservative. "( n6) As I began my fieldwork in 1997, the Turkish government had just gone through a major upheaval when the coalition government headed by the Islamist-leaning Welfare Party had been forced out of power by the Kemalist military in the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @). The party itself was soon after banned and its leader, Necmettin Erbakan, was barred from politics. Because Sincan is famous for its opposition to many of the government 's laicist policies, Sincan was a site of confrontation when the military sent in tanks to roll through its streets in the days leading up to the February 28, 1997 " coup. " The state 's nervousness about the potential power of Islam to shape politics goes back to before the founding of the Turkish Republic, but during the 1980s and 1990s the various state institutions and the military--as well as the media organizations largely sympathetic to the state--became hypervigilant to any incursions of Islam into the public sphere and into state institutions. Education was especially politicized in this context, since the state was deeply invested in creating a student body--the future citizens of Turkey--disposed toward the economic, political, military and cultural goals of the modern laicist society( Kaplan 2006 ; Altinay 2004). Still, autonomous Islamic practices were gaining visibility in the public sphere( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ party politics( zyrek 2006 ; White 2002 ; Navaro-Yashin 2002 ; Gle 1996). This increased visibility of religiously observant Turks in the public sphere has been a cause of tension for the state, a tension that sometimes erupted into crises, such as the soft coup of 1997, as well as more recent clashes between supporters of Kemalism and the moderate Islamic political parties in 2007. The Sincan Koran course and other courses like it have become increasingly popular in Turkey as part of the Islamic Revival or Islamic Awakening that has blossomed in Muslim majority societies around the world since the 1970s( Mahmood 2005:3). Meryem and her students, as well as many other Turks, embraced the Islamic revival and championed the Islamic parties in all their guises, often attending political events and rallies in support. But Meryem herself was not involved in the local network politics and activism that so successfully mobilized members of various lower class neighborhoods to support the Islamic parties that Jenny White has documented( 2002). Nor was Meryem 's @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the many cemaats growing in Turkish society. Cemaats are religious organizations established around or in affiliation with a charismatic leader, or " master "( seyh or hoca), who directs the group in terms of religious belief and practice. Some cemaats are less formal groups associated with the institutionalized, hierarchically organized Sufi orders, or tarikats, that include ecstatic rituals emphasizing direct contact with God( e.g., Raudevere 2002). Other cemaats, such as the Glen movement, focus more on proper religious belief and moral behavior with a strong social justice component( Turam 2007 ; Yavuz and Esposito 2003 ; see also Mardin 1989). Even though such organizations--tarikats and their affiliated groups--were formally outlawed at the time of the Turkish revolution, the cemaats and Sufi orders remain popular and influential in Turkish society. Meryem 's family had belonged to the deeply conservative Carsamba cemaati led by Sheik Mahmut Ustaosmanog. lu in the Fatih district of Istanbul, but had cut off their association with that cemaat a number of years before I met them @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the cemaat too isolationist and controlling, and Meryem herself disapproved of the ecstatic aspects of the cemaat 's practices. Meryem 's distancing from large religious and Islamist political organizations might be explained by her caution toward authority of any kind in religious matters, taking to heart the notion that the believer has an unmediated relationship to God. She saw herself as a guide to show other women how to cultivate this relationship and become conscious( s, uurlu) Muslims who live their lives according to Islamic precepts. Like the Islamist community described by Ays, e Saktanber( 2002:164), Meryem and her students sought guidance from Islamic law and tradition, looking to the Prophet Muhammad as the exemplar of Islamic thought and behavior, while trying to accommodate this idealized past to the requirements of the contemporary society. But unlike the community studied by Saktanber, Meryem 's course functioned outside the more established religious organizations, such as the cemaats and the Islamist parties, and actively carved out a relatively independent space in which women could create @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ receiving religious instruction from a more remote, official and usually male authority.A Recurring Theme : Education and Veiling As I became more involved in the Koran course, it quickly became apparent to me that while religious instruction formed the basis of the course, the discussion of religion almost always had a political slant. By " politics, " though, I do not only refer to the machinations of political parties and the structures of formal institutions, though these issues certainly came up in the Koran course discussions. Rather, the term politics is used here in its broadest sense to refer to the activities of daily life by which individuals formulate and act out their identity and their place in society. As Alev Cinar states( 2005:33), politics is " an ongoing activity of negotiations and confrontations in daily life through which hierarchies of power, political agency, and subjectivity are constructed. If politics involves the generation of power relations through various interventions in different fields of daily life, politics needs to be conceptualized as inseparably associated @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of politics as intertwined with what are traditionally considered " cultural " concerns was implicitly accepted by the Koran course students. The course discussions--which involved both Koranic interpretation of and concerns about activities of daily life, such as lifestyle choices about clothing, food, recreation, family life, and education--had intense political consequences for the students and for society at large. In a society like Turkey where the state has the power to define religion and where unauthorized religious practices in the public sphere are deemed dangerous, religion and its various expressions are inherently political. Part of Meryem 's goal as a teacher, it seemed, was to convey what she interpreted to be the daily life choices that would be most pleasing to God, while acknowledging and attempting to deal with the political fallout of those choices. For example, in one of the earliest sessions I attended, the class studied verses from the 7th Surah( A'raf, or " The Heights "), which the women recited by heart and which provided the basis of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ which translates as( Pickthall nd.), " Attribute they as partners to Allah those who created naught, but are themselves created. " Meryem adopted a common interpretation of this verse : that one should not let someone else change that which God has created. This puts that person in the place of God or makes him equal to God. So if some one tells you not to do something commanded in the Koran, then you should not listen to such persons. These people put themselves in the place of God while they are really created by God. In her sermon and the following discussion, Meryem applied this commandment to the controversy that raged then--and now--around the conservative Muslim veil, or tesettr. The so-called " headscarf dispute "( Olson 1985 ; see also Gle 1996, zdalga 1997, Saktanber 2006) encapsulates many of the major points of contention regarding the place and role of religion in Turkish republican society. In brief, the state bars women from wearing the headscarf in most public schools @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the dominant Kemalist discourse in Turkey, reinforced by the Kemalist media and educational system, which maintains that the revolutionary principles of laicismand modernization that Atatrk established during the formation of the Turkish Republic--including Atatrk 's condemnation of veiling--both liberated Turks from " oppressive " and " backward " Muslim practices of the Ottoman regime and liberated women from the male oppression supposedly typical of Muslim societies. That is, the transformation of women( especially women 's appearance and place) has long been equated with the transformation of Turkey. The discourse about veiled women as a " threat " derives partly from their growing visibility since the 1980s. Those Turks who espouse the state 's laicist principles often regard veiled women as visible indices of emergent anti-modern and even dangerous trends in Turkish society. Kemalist authorities, such as university presidents, academics, politicians, and news commentators, have claimed that the tesettr is a most visible sign of radical Islam, and that the wearers of the tesettr are in fact part of an anti-laicist movement bent on the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a theocracy based on Muslim law, or Seriat( see Saktanber 1997:176 ; zdalga 1997:480-483). For example, a former president of Istanbul University, Blent Berkarda, declared that the veil is a first step on the road to an Iranian-style revolution that would bring down the secular government( Cumhuriyet 1998). Another prominent academician likened the Muslim headscarf to the Nazi swastika( Abadan-Unat 1998). This type of reaction to the veil is part of the Kemalists ' persistent concern that " the inclusion of signs and symbols associated with Islamic cultural tradition means Islamization of society par excellence "( Saktanber 2006:24). The notion that the headscarf has essentially political significance denies the complex motivations that inform individual women 's decision to veil. Certainly, the Koran students supported the religious political parties that came and went during the 1980s and 1990s. But other issues, such as a concern for proper modesty and identity politics, also contributed to the upsurge in veiling in the 1980s. Veiled women often articulated a desire to identify @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ tastes, lifestyles, and political-social orientations over and against the dominant secularist lifestyles( see Gle 1996, Ismail 2004). More importantly, the state 's still-prevalent argument that the tesettr is " really " about politics assumes that other forms of clothing worn in public, such as Western-style clothing, are not political at all. This reflects the Kemalist position that their construction of the public sphere--as well as their rules about what symbols are permitted in that public sphere--is also essentially " neutral " and devoid of political meaning. But clearly for those who are the subjects of Kemalist power, there is nothing neutral about the ban on the tesettr or the imposition of Western clothing standards. The state establishes strict standards in such a way that no matter what the Koran course students wear, it has political significance for them. If they veil, they will be excluded from certain public spaces and institutions. If they do not veil, they will be violating not only their religious beliefs but also will be unwillingly surrendering their @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ The students were very aware of the fact that given the states construction of the public sphere, female bodies--their bodies--are intensely, explicitly political, and the performance of everyday activities, including wearing certain types of clothing outside the home, becomes a form of political theater. The reliance on bodily symbols as indicative of the nature of the nation as a whole has deep roots in Turkish thought( see Delaney 1994, 1991). The Turkish educational system itself promotes and reinforces the political importance of lifestyle choices. As Sam Kaplan has demonstrated( 2006:103-104), the Turkish educational system persistently promotes a narrative of progress and emancipation that comes to " saturate much of children 's historical consciousness. " This narrative includes the notion that what one wears indicates what place one occupies on the modern-primitive spectrum. The Turkish dominant discourse is that Western style clothing--especially bare-headedness--is a sign of modernity and the veil lies far at the other end of the spectrum. Thus I often heard in the media and in private conversation the firm conviction among @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ mentality) has no place in systems of education and especially not in the universities, which are institutions devoted to enlightenment. In accordance with this view, the Council of Higher Education of Turkey banned the veil from all university campuses in 1982, though this ban is only intermittently enforced. The ban on the tesettr and the attitude that many Kemalists took toward veiled women were not abstractions for Meryem and her students, but rather, many of the students had suffered directly from the strictures on veiling. Besides being subject to insults in some public places, especially when traveling outside Sincan, several of the students had to face some difficult situations because of their commitment to veiling. One young woman, Fatma, had just left the university after her third year as a biology education major, since her university had suddenly decided to prohibit veiled women from attending class or taking exams. Fatma was given a choice : unveil or leave. She left, never to complete her degree. Her younger sister, Meyda, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ rather than unveil, she decided to leave the country and pursue higher education in Australia. Not everyone can afford to make that choice, but she was certainly not the only Turkish woman to leave the country because of the ban on veiling at universities. Meryem herself was hoping to get a high school diploma through an equivalency program, but since the students in the program had to take the exams bareheaded, she often faced a dilemma about whether to continue or not.( n7) The women were quite bitter about what they perceived as the attack on a legitimate Muslim way of life, and the Koran course and the textual passages that formed the basis of the course could easily be applied to the very situations they faced on a daily basis. In the case of the Koran verse from " The Heights, " Meryem argued that when the Kemalists tell women not to wear the headscarves, the Kemalists are putting themselves in an inappropriate position by supposing themselves to be equal to God. Certainly, Meryem and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ did not mean neutrality towards religious practice. As Meryem complained to me in 2007, " If Turkey was truly secular, they would let us do what we want. Everyone--Muslim, Christian, Jew--could practice religion freely. " The sermon on " The Heights " represents the type of discourse Meryem wielded regularly in the Koran course, a type of discourse that the state finds dangerous and therefore prohibits in official religious education. People who are sympathetic to these views or other " suspect " ideas then must look to other venues to link social and political concerns to religious values. In the view of the Kemalists, such " unauthorized " courses served as arenas in which religion was supposedly politicized( a process explicitly prohibited by law(n8)) because the state and its limiting definitions of Islam were open to persistent criticism. Moreover, the Kemalist establishment feared that the courses were potential sites of political mobilization of a religious opposition. While this ban on these courses is only occasionally applied, the state disapproval of and rhetoric against @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ deep resentment for religiously observant Turks. As Meryem once complained to me, " Why do they think a bunch of girls in headscarves( birkac basouml ; rtl kiz) are a threat to the whole state? " Official Religious Education in Turkey The Turkish state under the leadership of Atatrk transferred control of the education process from the hands of religious authorities to the Republican government as a way of taming Islam for the purposes of creating a modern, laicist society. Still religious education itself was often seen as crucial to the well-being of the Turkish state and so, except for an eleven-year period from 1938 to 1949, religious education classes have been included in at least some grades for much of the history of the republic. The logic of this requirement was that the various political and military leaders of Turkey have looked to Islam as a means to try to unify the often fractious political interests and movements in modern Turkish history.( n9) Furthermore, Atatrk and his followers accepted the notion that Islam does provide a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ within the context of the private family. Rather than reject religion altogether, the state concerns itself with maintaining a form of Islam that harmonizes with the principle of laicism and eliminating rival and potentially " subversive " forms of Islamic thought in the Turkish polity( Kaplan 2006:65n). After the 1980 coup and with the formulation of the 1982 constitution, religion courses, called " Religious Culture and Ethics "( Din Kltr ve Ahlak Bilgisi), were made compulsory at primary and secondary levels. An express rationale for compulsory religious education was again the issue of control over religion, not freedom of religion. That is, the state explicitly argued that the state would impart " proper " Islam that is compatible with nationalism and modernity( Kaplan 2002 ; cf. Starrett 1998). Such an education would guarantee that children should not be unduly influenced by " false " family beliefs or other sources. This rationale for state religious education was made explicit in the standard instruction manual, The Elementary School Program( in Kaplan 2006:61 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ attention to the wrong and harmful traditions that they encounter in their families and persuade them to get rid of these traditions. " The goal, it seems, is to create a monoculture in which one form of Islam reigns, just as there is to be one culture( Turkish), one language( Turkish), and one future( progressive). Education serves to bring the people into this monoculture, so that " order " and " progress " are given more importance than ideas such as freedom and liberty( zdalga 1999:437). Furthermore, at least in the elementary schools, any teacher certified for elementary school instruction could teach religion, not a religious specialist. Since most school teachers in Turkey tend to be deeply committed to Kemalist principles, religious instruction tends to be tepid, hewing close to the Kemalist bone. An elementary-school religion teacher I interviewed in Istanbul expressed an attitude toward religion that was right in line with the state 's, an attitude I encountered repeatedly among self-identified Kemalists. The @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ compatible with modernity and enlightenment, the teacher told me. All other practices are " backward "( gereci) and " ignorant "( bilincsiz), if not downright dangerous to the state. My religiously conservative informants in Sincan and elsewhere were very aware of the state 's interpretation of Islam and grated against it. What is " harmless " Islam that is compatible to the national interests of Turkey, according to the Turkish Ministry of Education? As in any situation where religion is taught in the public schools, problems always arise as to what interpretation of religion should prevail. The Ministry of Education has issued directives in favor of an " official standard interpretation " of the Hanefi school of Islam, which is the most common( but not the only) tradition in Turkey. Religious instruction also tends to be very general. As Elisabeth zdalga has noted( 1999:434), this standardization of religious instruction creates a very watered down and repetitive course content, where what was taught in primary school is simply repeated @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ curriculum and textbooks lay out the beliefs and practices of basic Islam( the Five Pillars, the Six Beliefs) and emphasize how good Muslims should conduct themselves in relationship to family, community, and nation. Nationalist concerns frame the material, so that the textbooks invariably open with the words of the Turkish National Anthem, Istiklal Marsi( " Independence March "), as well as a portrait of Atatrk and a copy of his famous " Speech to the Youth. " There are also long sections describing the proper attitudes and conduct incumbent upon every Turkish citizen. The state-sponsored Koran courses for adults, usually held in neighborhood mosques, offered a curriculum similar to the Religious Culture and Ethics school courses. For this reason, these Koran courses were unpalatable options for many religiously observant Turks. As Meryem complained, the state courses were tightly controlled and fairly insipid, taught by teachers who are certified by the Directorate of Religious Affairs to give religious instruction according to the needs of the laicist state. These courses were @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ certificate when completed, the certificate is n't good for anything. One could not even become a Koran course teacher with this certificate. In her own Koran course Meryem used a standard publication from the Directorate of Religious Affairs, a text called Basic Religious Information( Temel Dini Bilgiler, Yazici 1997). But she only assigned the parts she approved of. For instance, she thought the sections on belief and prayer were adequate and so integrated them into her course, but she preferred a more in-depth study of Siyer--the Life of the Prophet( she used a Turkish translation of Martin Ling 's Life of Mohammad). Meryem completely rejected the Directorate 's interpretation of morals( ahlak) as presented in its publication. She complained that it includes only very basic ideas about morality, such as being kind to others and helping the poor. Since it is a book from the government, it spends a lot of time talking about how to be a good citizen, how it is important to fight for one 's @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Atatrk. Instead of the generalized, bland instructions on morality offered in the official religion course curriculum, Meryem and her students were interested in a more rigorous morality that emphasized lifestyle choices by which the individual could shape her whole life according to the will of God. They maintained similar concepts of ethics as those expressed by the women studied by Saba Mahmood in Egypt( 2005), in that they saw disciplined pious activity as a means of creating and enhancing devotion to God, rather than assuming that ethical thought( belief) must precede and give rise to pious activity, as assumed in most Western, specifically Kantian conceptions of ethics. That is, Kantian theories of ethics assume that ethical behavior follows naturally from ethical thought--again, a cognitive bias--whereas the women in Mahmood 's study, as well as the women in the Sincan Koran course, interpreted the relationship between thought and behavior in more dynamic ways. They believed that disciplined pious activities shape a certain desired religious subjectivity, which in turn inspires consciously ethical behavior @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ as inherently ethical since the activity not only reflects their piety but also shapes it. Thus the Koran course members concerned themselves not only with wearing appropriately modest clothing as a means of pleasing God, but of creating a moral attitude and social order in which sexual desire is expressed in appropriate ways. Women must veil, I was told on many occasions, so that men may not be provoked by women 's beauty and women are not tempted to put themselves on display for men. As one young student put it : " An apple will rot faster if it does n't have its skin. " She was suggesting that the veil is necessary for a woman to maintain her purity internally. That is, the woman needs a headscarf as a psycho-social mechanism that prevents her from stepping outside the social norms of feminine modesty and deference. A woman on display--without the veil--will be spoiled no matter what, even without the interference of potentially harmful men. For her, the veil is essential to the identity of a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ moral issue of great concern among the course members. Rules relating to gender segregation was also a focus of discussion. Environments in which men and women could properly inhabit their separate gendered spheres were sought out : gender segregated education, tea parks, meeting facilities, etc., were all seen as preferable to corresponding non-segregated spaces. The various resort towns along the Western coast of Turkey, with their displays of bodies and the endless parties and alcohol consumption, were specially condemned, but the women also were concerned to avoid television programs and films that display unchaste and impious lifestyles. Other issues, such as dietary restrictions, were recurrent sources of conversation as well. Such detailed understandings of ethics and ethical behavior had no place in the state religion education classes and curriculum, where ethics is treated only in generalized and rather simplistic terms. By all accounts, then, required religious courses seemed deeply inadequate. For laicist students, religion class represented only a boring burden of meaningless repetition--a complaint I heard from a large number @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ laicist parents I encountered, it was a source of pride if a child earned poor grades in the religion course. For pious students, the courses were just superficial and unsatisfactory.( n10) Pious students must look elsewhere for more meaningful religious instruction. The state does offer other options : there are religious high schools, called imam-hatip schools, which offer a mixture of secular curriculum( maths, sciences, history, Western languages) and religious instruction( e.g., Koran recitation, Arabic, Siyer, Exegesis). These schools also offer separate instruction for girls and boys, and girls are usually permitted to wear the headscarf. As such, imam-hitap high schools offer an acceptable option for families who would never send a pubescent daughter( who should be veiled) to a co-ed school in which the veil is prohibited. For both boys and girls from pious families, these high schools have been quite popular and are relatively pervasive in Turkish cities with the surge in rural-to-urban migration. Indeed, the number of imam-hatip @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 1990s( zdalga 1999:426). But over the past two decades as the Islamist movement in Turkey has taken a more prominent role in Turkish politics, the state has taken measures to control of religious education in many arenas. The imam-hatip schools have been subject to special scrutiny since the Kemalist establishment has suspected that the schools are at best arenas in which the Islamist-leaning political parties gained great influence and at worst incubators of religious radicalism. One great fear has been that the imam-hatip schools are places in which religious youth become radicalized by cemaats. Thus the imam-hitap schools have been under strong and continuous pressure to maintain a " moderate " curricula and remain non-political--that is, follow the supposedly " neutral " religious curriculum established by the state( Pak 2004). This has meant, in practice, that any suggestion of " political Islam, " such as a teacher expressing open support for the religious-right political parties, has been cause for legislative action to curtail the influence of unauthorized Islam in these contexts. One way the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to take steps to reduce their popularity. While previously imam-hatip students were only permitted to go on to theology departments in the universities, the laws were changed in 1974 allowing imamhatip graduates to enter any university department, so long as they passed the qualifying exams like all other students. This opened university doors to many more imam-hatip graduates and the number of imamhitap schools expanded rapidly in the post-1974 era. But in 1999, the laws were changed back so that imam-hatip students would be penalized on the university entrance exams( that is, given an automatic point deficit), thus making it much more difficult for students to enter the university at all or place well in the university system. This resulted in a dramatic drop in enrollment in imam-hatip schools. Another means of controlling the imam-hatip schools was to eliminate the middle school option. Earlier, imam-hatip education was available at both middle school and high school levels--that is, students could attend the imam-hatip schools once they were beyond the minimum fifth-grade level education required by the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ increased so that all students must complete the eighth grade. This new law in effect closed down all middle-grade imam-hatip schools, since an imam-hatip education could not fulfill the state educational requirement. Part of the government 's argument for this new eight-year education requirement was that the middle school years( 11 to 14 years of age) are a particularly vulnerable time period in a child 's intellectual development, and if middle-school age children attend the imam-hatip schools, such children could be " brain-washed "( beyin yikama) by the supposedly anti-state religious right represented in the imam-hatip schools. A middle-grade education in the state schools would ensure that children of this vulnerable age would be " protected " from the indoctrination of the imam-hatip schools. I heard this " brain-washing " argument from a number of sources--not only the mainstream media, but also from Kemalist academicians and well-educated elites who saw the closing of the imam-hatip middle schools as vital to state security in the face of a perceived Islamist threat.( n11) Such a concern over the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a prevalent notion that undergirds much of religious education policy : that the Kemalist state needs to save the people from themselves, especially from primitive or " false " religious traditions--such as veiling or gender segregation rules--that hatch in the family context or in unruly religious communities and threaten to contaminate the Kemalist order. One religiously observant university student interpreted the Kemalist position cynically : " The state makes sure that children are n't brainwashed into unauthorized interpretations of Islam by brainwashing the children first with authorized interpretations of Islam. " There are a few other educational options for religiously conscientious Turks. Most prominently, the religious movement of Fetullah Glen has established an international network of prestigious schools available to students who qualify. The Glen schools provide a pointedly secular, scientific education, which in part accounts for the Turkish state 's sometimes hesitant accommodation of these schools. But even as the education is thoroughly secular, students are obliged to board in school dormitories that are closely supervised and in which a religiously observant life-style is encouraged and even required( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ legal, officially acceptable options for religious education, a point state officials readily make when criticizing those who would set-up alternative forms of religious instruction. But for many pious individuals, these options remain unworkable for several reasons. I have already mentioned the complaints lodged against the religion courses in the schools and the state Koran courses. And even if the imam-hatip education or the Glen schools may be more satisfying to religious conservatives, not everyone wants to or can attend these schools. High school is not compulsory in Turkey at this time, and not all eligible teenagers plan to go to high school. The Glen schools are highly competitive and therefore not open to everyone who would like to attend. For those beyond high school age, both the Glen and the imam-hatip schools are never an option. Most crucially, all the members of the Koran course made it clear that religious study is a life-long pursuit that is important to the maintenance and enhancement of piety. One does not simply establish once and for all an @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ " for being a Muslim. Rather, good Muslims pursue religious understanding and persistently attempt to shape one 's life according to the will of God. This is an on-going struggle( cihad), as many observant Muslims reminded me. The situations and innovations of the age--and of any age--require constant return to scripture and on-going guidance from religious adepts. A diploma from an imam-hatip high school or a certificate from a Koran course is only one step in this continuing journey toward self-perfection. The repetitious and narrow curriculum offered in state-sponsored religious education programs are incomplete guides in the journey at best, and at worst, steps in the wrong direction. The most common complaint that pious Muslims lodge against state sponsored religious education is the issue of control--the control of content, the control of interpretation, the control of curriculum, and of course, the control of political discourse. The Turkish state dictates religious content in all public contexts in order to make sure religious messages do not clash with or threaten state definitions of religion. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Islam itself has been categorized and marginalized by the Turkish state. They just want to teach Islam the way they understand Islam--spiritually, socially, ritually, as well as politically--without interference. The Koran course students and many observant Muslims argue that this is a basic right of the freedom of conscience and belief( vicdan ve inanc zgrlg). But " uncontrolled, " autonomous religion is precisely what the Turkish establishment finds so utterly threatening, enough so to establish laws forbidding religious instruction outside of state supervision. While the laws are often aimed at the cemaats, who may use religion courses to organize militant opposition groups, they have the effect of suppressing all types of independent religious instruction. In an effort to keep the public sphere " free " from problematic Islam, the state reached into what the Koran course students considered to be their private lives, dictating how they should dress and how they should practice their religion. As I have mentioned, unauthorized Koran courses are not uncommon, especially in conservative neighborhoods in the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ status of the neighborhood Koran courses are not a great cause for concern. As with many laws in Turkey, it is difficult for the government to enforce its ban on a relatively widespread( and popular) practice, and so it does n't try very hard--except when the state feels itself threatened by the religious right, as it did following the " soft coup " that ended the Welfare government in 1997. Since Sincan had been a major site of military action leading up to the coup, the women of the Koran course were still quite nervous about their own situation during the period of my fieldwork, and they took steps to conceal what it was they were doing, such as meeting in different homes every day. The students told me with some fascination that Meryem could receive a five-year jail sentence if they were caught. The extent to which this was a genuine threat was not clear, but there were enough stories circulating in both the print media and in private conversations about teachers, cemaat leaders, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ or being given fines or jail sentences that the threat felt real. The women in the course told me several such " stories " they had heard about the state treatment of pious Muslims. One student reported that a village woman who was reading the Koran aloud in her own house, and soldiers came, dragged her into the street and killed her. Meryem told me another story, in which a certain singer would sometimes vocalize the melody by using the sound, " hooo "( like humming). But " Hoo " is one of the ninety-nine beautiful names of Allah, and after the 1980 revolution during the repressive presidency of General Kenan Evren( 1980-1989), the man was given a punishment for using religion in his songs. Both of these stories are most likely apocryphal. Two well educated religious men I reported them to doubted their truth, though these same men also regaled me with stories of religious individuals who had lost their jobs or had been fined or jailed for their beliefs and practices @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ course students ' sense of intimidation from the Kemalist government. Certainly, this theme of besetment from Kemalist authorities recurred in Meryem 's sermons, so, for example, Meryem frequently likened the Turkish government to the Pharaoh of Egypt( Firavun), while pious Muslims, such as the inhabitants of Sincan, were like the oppressed holy ones, Musa and Harun( Moses and Aaron), seeking escape so they could establish a proper religious community.Conclusion : Tame Islam vs. Wild Islam The Kemalist tendency to privilege the personal, interior aspects of religion over the exterior, social aspects results in the expectation that " good " Turks will keep Islam( especially those aspects of Islam at variance with state expectations) in the private realm, out of the public sphere and certainly out of public institutions such as schools. Indeed, the state 's conception of the " private sphere " seemed very narrowly construed and at times seemed almost synonymous with " hidden " --at least hidden from the very watchful gaze of the state. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ them quite clearly objected to the government 's attitude toward and control of public religious activity, especially because of the assumptions that the state makes about the nature of religion and secularism as categories. Turkey deliberately adopted the Western liberal concept of secularism that depends on a very specific idea of what constitutes " religion " --an idea that does not easily accommodate non-Western, especially Muslim, understandings of religion. The concept of secularism has required that the category " religion " be isolated from other arenas of human interaction, such as " ethics " or " politics "( Asad 2003:2). In Turkey this has translated into the belief that Islam can and should be practiced only in certain ways and in certain places. Other religious activities not deemed proper for the public sphere should be discarded, or at least kept hidden in the privacy of the home, even if these activities--such as choice of clothing or forms of knowledge--might be more often thought of as individual freedoms available to all citizens. Since Islam is primarily about " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ policy, one can shed unwanted religious practices without harm to " true " Islam. Thus a woman can discard the headscarf and still be a true Muslim. An individual can drink alcohol or skip the Ramazan fast and still be truly Muslim. Here, practice is secondary to belief and is therefore dispensable. The Islamic practices that do prevail in the expansively defined public sphere, especially in state institutions, have been properly " tamed, " that is, made to fit the laicist, nationalist needs of Turkey. Policy regarding religious education is thus geared toward this domestication process. All other forms of religious education are de jure( if not always de facto) prohibited for fear they may hatch some imagined form of " wild " Islam--Islam bent on bringing down the " secularist " state. In a word, the Turkish state of Mustafa Kemal Atatrk has found the " essence " of Turkish Islam and that essence should be satisfactory. This " proper " --that is, neutral--Islam is supposedly compatible with nationalism and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ traditional beliefs or other " harmful " sources. And it is the Kemalist establishment( government, courts, military) that has decided what those so-called " harmful traditions " are. I do not mean to suggest that Meryem 's course represents " genuine " Islam and the state 's form is less genuine. That is, I am not reversing the state 's evaluation of " true " vs. " false " forms of Islam, though the students ' own goal in the Koran course was to develop an understanding of what for them was genuine or " clean "( temiz) Islam. Rather, I am arguing that the state 's concept of Islam runs afoul of many other interpretations of Islam at work in Turkish society--and the interpretation in the members of the Koran course was only one such alternative conception of Islam. Yet the state has the power and authority to enforce its own form of Islam over and against the views and wishes of many of its citizens. In fact, it seems fair to argue @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Islamists, since they attempt to impose by law and force a particular interpretation of Islam, while the moderate AK party and its supporters, such as the students in the Koran course, are closer to true civil secularists, since they have articulated a desire to allow for less state control and more freedom of religious practice.( n12) In any case, the Kemalist state has set up a very useful dichotomy : " true " acceptable Islam and " bad " dangerous Islam, which runs parallel to( and precedes) the " Good Muslim-Bad Muslim " opposition prevalent in American political language after the attacks of September 11, 2001. As Mahmood Mamdani has pointed out( 2004), much rhetoric in the US media and political speeches aimed to distinguish good Muslims from bad Muslims, such as those that supported the terrorist attacks. As Mamdani noted( 2004:24), in this rhetoric " good Muslims are modern, secular, and Westernized, and bad Muslims are doctrinal, antimodern, and virulent. " Moreover @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ stems from the Muslims themselves--the good ones accommodate change ; the bad ones are disgruntled, obscurantist and dangerous, rather than legitimately angry at the historical injustices that have been perpetrated against them. In the Turkish case, this dichotomization most obviously acts to polarize the political field, to create a good " us " vs. a bad " them. " By homogenizing and objectifying " Islamism " to include anyone that objects to the state 's definition of religion, the Kemalist establishment solidifies its own political position as protectors of the modern laicist state. These guardians--especially the military and the judicial system--can then act as the deployers of legitimate violence against the so-called threats posed by this " Islamist " monolith. For pious Muslims the Turkish state 's conception of religion as essentially cognitive, private, and pushed into the shadowy " corners " of society is in direct opposition to Muslim history and belief. For them, the Turkish Kemalist establishment has bought into imperialist doctrine, thereby jettisoning genuine Islam in the name of modernity. Many pious @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ doctrine that violates their understandings of religion, and they break Turkish state law in order to fulfill the laws of God. Women wear the headscarf in public institutions or people establish unauthorized Koran courses in their neighborhoods. They attempt to bring their understanding of religion out of the hidden corners of society to make space for themselves in the public sphere.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The research for this article was made possible by grants from the Wenner-Gren Foundation, the Institute of Turkish Studies, and the Sachar Fund of Brandeis University. I would like to thank Louis Cristillo, Fida Adely, Kenneth Guest, and the members of the Middle East and Muslim World Education Studies Society of Teachers College, Columbia University, for their comments on various drafts of this work.FOOTNOTES( n1) From the perspective of secularism, the Turkish state 's position vis--vis religion has not been monolithic and unchanging. According to Ihsan Yilmaz( 2005 : 386), " different interests, power groups, elite and segments within the state have their different agendas, visions and ideas @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ if not within politics. From time to time, the emphasis of the state on this role of Islam changes in accordance with conjecture, socio-politics and geo-politics. " While I agree that there has not been a single state Islam, it is in fact the state that designates what form of religious practice is acceptable in the public sphere, which leaves those who do not agree with the state 's conceptions of Islam vulnerable to state controls.( n2) The problem of defining the " public sphere " in Muslim societies is a point of discussion in a number of academic works. See, for example, Salvatore and Levine 2005, Cinar 2005, Mahmood 2005, Deeb 2006, Turam 2007.( n3) The crackdown on people who violate official secularism tends to be sporadic, often propelled by larger political issues. Certainly, students and teachers in the public K-12 schools are consistently barred from veiling, but other violations are randomly enforced, often in reaction to a general upsurge in concern about the rise of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ new form of veiling in that appeared in Turkey in the early 1980s. It generally consists of a large headscarf that covers the hair and drapes loosely over the shoulders, sometimes worn with a long, shape-concealing overcoat, though the practice of wearing a coat has waned over the 2000s.( n5) My fieldwork was multi-sited : I was involved in research in another neighborhood near Ankara and one in Istanbul from 1997 to 1999, with further visits in the summers of 2004, 2006, and 2007. The material for this paper draws primarily from the participant observation fieldwork in Sincan in 1998-1999.( n6) I am reluctant to label pious individuals as " conservative, " since there are many different kinds of conservatism in Turkey, including Kemalism. In this context, I use terms such as " observant " or " pious " to describe the practitioners such as the women in the Sincan course who see themselves as practicing a more conscious( s, uurlu) and rigorous form of Islam than do Kemalists( see @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Turks, regardless of their political orientation, see themselves as Muslim in that they believe in the basic principles of Islam.( n7) Meryem was able to complete her program, though it took a number of years. The ban on the veil in universities depended on people enforcing it. Often exam proctors would turn a blind eye to the presence of veiled women in exams, though obviously one could not consistently count on the kindness of strangers.( n8) Article 1 of the 1925 Law for the Maintenance of Order made " exploitation of religion toward political ends " a capital crime( Kaplan 2006:65n). Though this law was eventually repealed, the " use of religion for political purposes "( Demirel in zdalga 1999:438) is seen as subversive and directly threatening to the Republic itself.( n9) For a history of education in the Turkish republic, see Kaplan 2006, especially chapter 2. For the military 's attitude toward religion and religious education, see Kaplan 2002, Altinay 2004.( n10 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ also conflict with the beliefs of the Alevis, the Shi'a-like minority that constitutes about 15%-20% of the Turkish population and whose practices are based in the Shafi branch of Islam. The Alevis have lodged complaints about the religious education requirements because of the curricular conflicts with their own beliefs.( n11) I do not mean to imply that an anti-imam-hatip agenda was the sole reason for the boost in the level of required education. Certainly, many government officials were concerned that a fifth-grade education was simply not enough to prepare Turkish children for the challenges of the modern economy and vocational environment.( n12) I would like to thank one of the anonymous reviewers for pointing this out to me.REFERENCES 
