235341 Noah Adams, host : This is " All Things Considered. " I 'm Noah Adams. Lynn Neary, host : And I 'm Lynn Neary. Russian President Boris Yeltsin returned to Moscow today from a Black Sea resort to mark the first anniversary of the attempted coup in the former Soviet Union. Later this week, Yeltsin will attend a rally in front of the Russian Parliament building where three people were shot by troops as the coup began to unravel. Adams : The efforts of a group of hard-line Communists failed. The coup did n't work as they planned. Five years into Gorbachev 's program of glasnost and perestroika, the radical reform of Soviet economics and the lifting of restrictions on personal freedom, the clock could not be turned back. The 48 hours of the coup shocked the world, and when it failed, it started a chain of events that brought down the Soviet Union and split it into more than a dozen new nations. And it led to the disappearance of Mikhail Gorbachev from the world stage. From Moscow, NPR 's @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ago and in the months since. Mike Shuster reporting : It was an event that would change everything. Everything. Not just in what was then the Soviet Union, it literally changed the world, changed how we think about geopolitics. And it caught nearly everyone by surprise. Early morning, Monday, August 19 : the tanks were swarming to downtown Moscow and the airwaves were crackling with the first news reports. Vladimir Posner, the Soviet TV personality who was raised in the United States, was in the country as were many Muscovites. After all, this was August, summer in Moscow. Vladimir Posner( Soviet TV Personality) : I had gone for my morning run and came back at about 7:00 in the morning, turned on the television set and there was my friend -- a man by the name of Yuri Petrov, who still is television 's Channel Number One star announcer. He 's got this ringing baritone, which sounded dead and flat, and he looked very pale and green @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ this document about this State Committee for the State of Emergency as it called itself. And I immediately understood what had happened, and my wife was standing next to me, and I have to tell you in all honesty that our feeling was that for people like ourselves and for all the changes and for all the movement towards freedom and democracy, it was all over. Shuster : Everyone everywhere assumed the worst, that the coup in Moscow would bring a return of totalitarianism within the Soviet Union, and in international relations, would resurrect the Cold War. Galina Starovoitova, a close adviser to Russian President Boris Yeltsin, was in London when it happened, and one of her strongest memories is of a fax she received early that morning from Moscow. Galina Starovoitova( Adviser to President Boris Yeltsin) : This fax was signed by one of the officers of the KGB who supported Democrats and some of them joined to democratic power after coup, and he informed me that it was very dangerous for me @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ arrested, and -- and they -- he informed me that it 's very probable that I can be arrested at once if I shall come back. Shuster : Gorbachev had been arrested and held at his vacation home in the Crimea. But those who were carrying out the coup wanted the world to think otherwise, so quickly that afternoon, they organized a press conference and Soviet Vice President Gennady Yanayev, his hands shaking visibly, made the incredible claim that Gorbachev was simply not well. The world got its first glimpse of the leaders of the coup when this press conference was broadcast by CNN. Gennady Yanayev( Former Vice President) : He is very tired after these many years, and he will need some time to get better. And it is our hope that... Shuster : Perhaps the coup began to collapse at that very moment when the people of the Soviet Union saw the coup plotters sweating, uncertain, hesitant, no longer the iron-fisted, tolerate-no-dissent leaders of the past. Many are still @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ moment. The questions persist. Why did n't they use the force they had amassed on the streets of Moscow to crush the opposition? Why did they let thousands gather at Yeltsin 's headquarters, the Russian White House, which became the nation 's symbol of democratic resistance? Why was n't Yeltsin arrested? Why did n't they turn off the switch to the television satellite dishes and computers that so quickly showed and told the world what was happening in Moscow? Political analyst Georgi Arbatov says the coup leaders were so out of touch with their own nation that they failed to recognize how much it had changed. Georgi Arbatov( Political Analyst) : It was to very serious degree like the generals prepare for the last war. They prepared for the last coup, 1964. Shuster : The year Nikita Khrushchev was removed bloodlessly from power. Vladimir Posner has another explanation : that the coup plotters did comprehend how much the Soviet Union had changed and how much its economy and security now depended on good relations with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the coup tried to preserve the illusion that they would continue Gorbachev 's policies. Posner : These were all top government people. The army was in the streets, the tanks were there. They felt they could play it being democratic. They felt that, you know, let Yeltsin talk and let the correspondents do their work and so on. Here we are, we say we want -- we support Gorbachev 's principles of perestroika and glasnost and so on. They wanted to show the world -- and this was very important to them -- that they were basically carrying out the same policies. What they did n't figure on was that there would be, I guess, maybe 70,000 to 100,000 people who would stand up and say no.( Excerpt of man talking in Russian) Shuster : That first morning, Boris Yeltsin did speak. He climbed up on a tank outside the White House and told the crowd and the nation not to capitulate. ' I call on the troops not to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and I call for a general strike to challenge the coup. ' The world was electrified by his courage and resistance. Just recently from prison, those who led the coup have begun a new campaign against Yeltsin. Vladimir Kryuchkov, the former head of the KGB and many believe the mastermind of the coup, wrote recently that Yeltsin 's reputation for heroism has been built on a myth, that Yeltsin knew very well the coup plotters had no intention of attacking the White House. Vadim Pechinyev, who stayed in the White House those three tense days, says otherwise. Vadim Pechinyev( Communist) :( Through Interpreter) I disagree with Kryuchkov, who said that it was all a game on the part of Yeltsin and the other leaders and defenders of the White House. Shuster : Yeltsin certainly knew what was at stake -- his life, his presidency, the future of the nation. It was to be the most important moment of Yeltsin 's life, without which he may not have been able @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the Soviet Union itself and the resignation of Gorbachev. It made Yeltsin, in the view of Vladimir Posner, into a real leader. Posner : He was not the most pleasant of men to those who knew him. He was one of these big, loud, fist-thumping, cursing, drinking, typical party strongman, really not a -- an attractive human being. He became a real figure after he was elected president of Russia in June of 1991. Now of course the fact that -- that Gorbachev kept going after him, kept trying to get him, kept trying to sink him, led to a relationship where it was actually it 's either me or you. And -- and the coup served to make it possible for Yeltsin to actually say, ' OK, it 's me. It 's not you. ' Shuster : The coup revealed just how serious the struggle for power Yeltsin and Gorbachev were engaged in, and the coup clarified who was the stronger.( Excerpt of crowd @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 20th of August, the crowd outside the Russian White House had erected barricades to block the building from the onslaught of the tanks. The fears of Monday had given way to a tentative feeling of confidence that perhaps this coup would, after all, not succeed. Vladimir Posner remembers the first moment he thought the coup might fail. It was when he appeared on ABC 's " Nightline " early that Tuesday morning Moscow time, along with a hard-liner, the so-called Black Colonel, Victor Alksnis. Posner : And Alksnis, on the day of the coup, the 19th, had been applauding it and saying, ' finally and it 's high time, ' and all of this. And then -- this was the very early morning of the 20th -- and here was Alksnis suddenly very reserved and saying, ' Well, I do n't know whether the coup is really -- whether this is a coup or whether it 's not a coup and whether it 's legal or whether it 's not and it @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ' And that to me was the first signal that something was wrong insofar as the coup was concerned. And I thought maybe this man knows something I do n't know at all. Shuster : The full story is still not known about really what went wrong with the plans of the plotters and probably wo n't be known until the 12 charged with carrying out the coup go on trial, possibly sometime next winter. But it is clear that the plotters were not able to maintain discipline in the army, that crucial strike-force troops had refused to cooperate and could not be counted on to carry out orders and shoot civilians if necessary. If the military had helped -- after all, the Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov was one of the plotters -- the coup almost certainly would have succeeded. That still did not prevent blood from being shed early in the morning of Wednesday, August 21.( Excerpt of the coup with people shouting) Shuster : Three young men who had come to defend the White House were @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with Molotov cocktails -- and the tanks. But by that time, the coup was already a failure. One of its leaders, Nikolai Pavlov, Gorbachev 's prime minister, had made public his break with the plot. And several others, including Kryuchkov and Yazov, were hinting at similar steps.( Excerpt of singing) Shuster : The youthful defenders of the White House celebrated all the next night as the world drew a breath. The meaning of these events was astounding. Like the Russian revolution in 1917, again a small fraction of the people in a single city had determined the fate of an enormous nation. The massive Soviet state, weakened and divided by the process of change that Gorbachev had unleashed, had proved so hollow and fragile, that 150,000 people who took to the streets to defend a vague notion of democracy could end three-quarters of a century of Communist control. Now, a year later, many like Georgi Arbatov, remember almost wistfully the drama and promise of those days. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their bare hands and our people have defeated the biggest army, the biggest secret police in the world, and there was such -- such elan among the people that you could have done miracles with it. But I think here everybody missed the chance. Shuster : Unfortunately, that 's the lament you hear most in Moscow these days. The revolution of last August was a missed opportunity. Former political prisoner Sergei Kovalyov 's views are typical of many who defied the coup. Sergei Kovalyov( Former Political Prisoner) :( Through Interpreter) After August, there were a lot of miscalculations, especially we lost much time. If the Congress of People 's Deputies had been convened in September following the coup, we would by now have had the best constitution that this country has ever known. But now this Congress can not adopt this constitution and I strongly doubt that it will ever be adopted. I think it 's very important because our economic transformation is seen to a great extent by the imperfection of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ that the Russian president should have pressed forward with his economic-reform program then, not four months later when the reforms actually began. Why was the leadership too slow, do you think? Starovoitova : Maybe they did n't have enough defined plan. Maybe they were too tired after coup and need -- have some psychological and physical rest. It was not enough responsible to be so slow I think.( Excerpt of crowd cheering) Shuster : So, too, do many feel that the promise of the revolution that began last August has been unfulfilled. When on the day after the coup ended, on August 22, a crowd gathered outside the headquarters of the KGB and tore down the statue of its founder, Feliks Dzerzhinsky, many thought that would be the end of the dreaded Soviet Secret Police. Now radical Democrats, like Gleb Yakunin, a priest and member of the Russian Parliament, have their doubts. Gleb Yakunin( Russian Parliament) :( Through Interpreter) What has happened here is the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ every revolution. We pulled down this statue to Dzerzhinsky but the building itself remained intact. Here the process is going too slowly. Oleg Kalugin( Former KGB Colonel) : We expected in the August of 1991 that the old KGB will be all finished with. Shuster : Oleg Kalugin is a former colonel in the KGB and supporter of the democratic movement in Russia. Kalugin : Unfortunately, this process of reconstruction of the organization has -- was stopped in the beginning of 1992 with the demise of the Soviet Union with the exit of such reformers as Bakatin, the former chairman of the KGB. All the reforms inside the organizations have stopped. Shuster : Similarly, in the military, Georgi Arbatov argues, not enough was done to clean out all those who did not deserve to stay after the coup. Arbatov : Some of the generals who supported the coup, called for the coup, took part in the coup, remained in their places. And I remember what happens to -- to the American @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ policy. Shuster : The disappointment with the post-coup process of reform may be so deep because, at first, Yeltsin was so energetic. Immediately after the coup failed, when both Yeltsin and Gorbachev appeared before the Russian Parliament, Yeltsin let Gorbachev and the nation know just who was now on top. Gorbachev, having been ousted by the Communist Party 's leaders and having been restored to power by Yeltsin, feebly tried to defend the party that was already dead. With no warning, Yeltsin stunned Gorbachev and announced that he was suspending the activities of the Communist Party. President Boris Yeltsin :( Through Interpreter) Comrades, I 'd like to present a decree on the suspension of the activities of the Russian Communist Party. The decree is hereby signed.( Clapping) Shuster : In truth, Yeltsin and his circle of advisers were confused in the aftermath of the coup. They were in power but Gorbachev still sat in the Kremlin. Who made the laws : the Russian Parliament or the Soviet Parliament @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ or the Soviet Union? Yeltsin needed to answer those questions before any others, and thus he set about dismantling the Soviet government and constructing his own. That process took nearly four months. In forming the Commonwealth of Independent States last December, Yeltsin and the other leaders of the former Soviet republics finally declared the death of the Soviet Union. The world recognized the truth of this when Gorbachev resigned on Christmas day. For many, all this has proved far more painful than they expected during those triumphant days in August. Vadim Pechinyev was a Communist who believed that communism could be made democratic and who believed he was protecting that ideal in defending the White House. Pechinyev :( Through Interpreter) So radically, of course, I understood that the death of the Communist Party meant the beginning of the death of the Soviet Union -- its disintegration -- but emotionally, I did n't believe it. Shuster : Pechinyev is typical of hundreds of thousands in Russia who view the lasting impact of the coup with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the coup, the splintering of the Soviet Union into 15 separate nations with all their boiling ethnic conflicts, a historical catastrophe. Pechinyev :( Through Interpreter) Tragic, especially for the 25 million Russians who, for decades, considered the Soviet Union their native land and who now find themselves without a state and without a native land. There was little happiness in this.( Music played) Shuster : May 1 of this year on Red Square, the first May Day in post-Soviet Russia, where before red banners fluttered and workers marched, now traditional singers ad-libbed verses on love and the virtues of tilling one 's own little piece of land. The culture of Russia is reasserting itself, and in the process, even many of those who called themselves Democrats are having doubts about the process of change that last August 's events set in motion. Sergei Stankevich, then vice mayor of Moscow, was always quick to condemn the conservative old guard with fiery anti-Communist rhetoric. Now, as adviser to Yeltsin @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ coup, not of those who mounted it and not of their ultimate goals ; but Stankevich now says the leaders of the coup, or the " putsch, " as it 's called here, acted in a way that many in Russia understood to be patriotic. Sergei Stankevich( Former Vice Mayor of Moscow) : Some ideas proclaimed by organizers of the putsch were quite popular, were accepted as serious interest by population. More a people-oriented reforms -- land that should be given to the people, guarantees against crime, first of all against street crime and hard hand against criminals, state paternalism. And they are very sensitive to such things as the state that takes care. Shuster : This conclusion has led Stankevich and others who oppose the coup to challenge the validity of the econonic-reform process under way in Russia today. Stankevich : It 's impossible simply to impose classic liberal ideas and models upon the country violently. It -- it would be a -- a violation over mentality of the people, and sooner @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Shuster : By politicians of this kind, Stankevich means those now in power, those like Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar who has been in charge of the Russian economic reform program. Unidentified Woman :( Through Interpreter) We have very expensive meats too -- fish, chicken, very expensive chicken. We have -- we feel nothing but fear. We do n't know what 's going to happen further. Shuster : A scene in a Russian food store repeated thousands of times since the process of reform began early this year. The reforms have brought many changes to Russia, not all of them welcomed by most of the people. Prices are 10 to 20 times higher than they were a year ago, but wages are not. Many in Russia have been hurt by the reforms. They are bewildered by the swirl of events they 've lived through and truly have no idea where their society is headed. Although many like Stankevich are not pleased with Russia 's direction, there are many who are. Vladimir @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ months in the United States. He returned to Moscow in June. Posner : And I have to tell you very frankly that I, by far, prefer the country that I came to than the one I left. Yes, things are very difficult. Yes, I understand that. However, today if you do have money, there 's much more available than there ever was before. You see people using their heads to make a ruble. You see people demonstrating initiative, which before was absolutely not the case. Shuster : Thus once again, Russia is confronted with the question that it has struggled with for the past 300 years : whether it looks westward for its future or whether it looks elsewhere, not necessarily eastward but perhaps inward into itself and its particular troubled history. What will be the decisive factor? Probably as the decidedly non-Marxist radical priest Gleb Yakunin says, it will be economics. Yakunin :( Through Interpreter) If our economy wo n't hold up, if the process @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ land wo n't be given to -- pass the factories to the workers, they wo n't be privatized. Then I think a kind of uncontrolled process will start, which can indeed paralyze the economy and then the people will be in the streets. This is the greatest danger now. Shuster : And so in this one particular sense, the country is no different from the one it was before. Then the question was, who can provide for the people of the Soviet Union? Today the question remains, who can provide for the people of Russia? This is Mike Shuster reporting.( Music played) Neary : It 's " All Things Considered. "( Credits given) 
