235241 Lynn Neary, host : There was an unusual meeting in London this week. For the first time in 16 years, a British prime minister sat down with Northern Ireland 's top political leaders to discuss the troubles of that divided province. John Major called the meeting in an effort to revive talks that stalled last summer between Northern Ireland 's Catholic and Protestant communities. He hopes to stem an upsurge in violence in Northern Ireland which has already claimed more than 25 lives this year. Joining us to discuss this and other stories is Conor O'Clery, Washington correspondent for the Irish Times, which is published in Dublin. Welcome, Conor. Conor O'Clery commentating : Thank you. Neary : The talks this week come during one of the most bloody periods in Northern Ireland -- perhaps the bloodiest since British troops were first deployed there in 1969. Why this sudden increase in violence? O'Clery : Well, the violence in Northern Ireland has tended to ebb and flow for the last 20, 24 years. The upsurge in violence coincides with the failure of the political @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the talks which they have been trying to get going for the last seven or eight months. And I think that the fact that violence continues is associated with the fact that there is continuing constitutional instability in Northern Ireland. Nobody there knows quite what the future 's going to be, and the IRA, which has been fighting to get the British to leave, has been trying to negotiate its way to the conference table, has been trying to force the question of Northern Ireland onto their political agenda. And given that there is a general election coming up in the United Kingdom very shortly, this, I think, would account for the fact that they are making a greater effort at this time. Neary : Well, the political wing of the IRA, Sinn Fein -- the legal wing of the IRA -- has not been part of these talks, and I guess the -- the question really is can anything truly be accomplished without representation by Sinn Fein? O'Clery : Well, all the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ they have all excluded the possibility of Sinn Fein taking part in the talks because they say this can not happen until they renounce the use of violence. But an interesting subterranean movement can be detected. A debate has begun in the British press of late as to whether or not this is -- this should be holy writ. There is a debate now on the future of Northern Ireland which people are beginning to contribute to in terms of, ' How are we going to accommodate the people who are involved in violence? ' I think the interesting situation that has developed is that we have a prime minister in Great Britain who 's now interested himself in Northern Ireland who has n't yet written his political agenda on Anglo-Irish affairs. And we have a new prime minister in the republic who also has n't written his agenda for the Anglo-Irish situation. We have in place an Anglo-Irish agreement which commits the two governments -- the government of the republic of Ireland and the government of the United Kingdom -- to cooperate @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ And I think somewhere down the road we might see a situation where Sinn Fein might find some forms for being involved in these talks. There are indications coming from Sinn Fein, too, and its leader, Jerry Adams, who 's a member of the British Parliament -- that they would like to be involved, and I think I -- I -- we will -- we will have to wait, however, until after the British general election. And an interesting point is that if the -- the British Liberal Party is returned after the election, we might see a new situation because it 's committed, technically at least, to a united Ireland. Neary : OK. I 'm going to switch gears pretty strongly here now to a story that 's going on in the Irish community in this country in -- in New York City. Once again there is a controversy over whether gay and lesbian people -- Irish people -- should be allowed to participate in the St. Patrick 's Day Parade. Can you @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ O'Clery : Yes. Well, briefly, the background is that last year a new Irish gay and lesbian organization in New York applied to join the parade, and the organizers did n't want them. But the organizers of the parade is the Ancient Order of Hibernians, and this is a Catholic Irish organization dedicated to upholding the tenets of the Roman Catholic Church. They mar -- they marched last year, the gay and lesbian organization, but only because they were invited by a rebel section of the Ancient Order of Hibernians. Mayor Dinkins marched with them to -- to express his solidarity with them and to express his disapproval of the fact that they were n't given official recognition. And there were rather ugly scenes. People shouted and threw beer, in some cases, at Mayor Dinkins. This year the organization has applied to march again -- the Irish lesbian and gay organization. And it 's become an issue of human rights as far as Dinkins and the New York administration are concerned, and as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is concerned it 's become a matter of faith and morals. Neary : Hmm. O'Clery : They have refused again to allow the Irish group to participate. The New York Human Rights Commission is now going to hold a hearing with Mayor Dinkins ' approval as to whether or not this is a breach of human rights. Neary : Is it possible that the St. Patrick 's Day Parade, which is quite a large tradition in New York City, might not be held? O'Clery : There are mutterings of frightful scenes if -- if this situation does n't resolve, but I detect -- I 've interviewed both the leader of the Ancient Order of Hibernians in the United States and the leader of -- one of the leaders of the gay and lesbian organization, and I detect a very strong desire for some sort of a compromise. Neither side wants this to get out of hand. Neary : OK. Thanks very much for joining us. Conor O'Clery is the Washington correspondent for the Irish Times, which @ @ @ @ @ 
