4084041 The controversial health care overhaul passed by Congress as the Affordable Care Act and then amended by the Reconciliation Act of 2010 includes changes in the Medicare program that are supposed to reduce the Federal deficit by $525,000,000,000 between now and 2019. Of this amount about $424,000,000,000 comes from changes in coverage and payment rules. This includes limits on annual rate increases for hospitals and other providers that furnish health care to our nation 's 46,000,000 elderly and disabled Medicare beneficiaries. The ACA also includes cuts in payments to Medicare Advantage plans, private organizations that serve beneficiaries as an alternative to the orignal Medicare program - the remaining $100,000,000,000 is to come from new revenue sources for toe Medicare trust funds. These include changes in the Medicare payroll taxes paid by high-income earners and new fees for drug manufacturers and importers. Skeptics of ACA say that cuts in provider payments are too sharp and could, over the long term, lead to reduced access or quality of care for Medicare patients. Congress eventually could face pressure to rescind the cuts, causing much of the purported budgetary savings to evaporate. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ there is enormous room for health care providers to improve the efficiency of medical care and that the Affordable Care Act will promote systemwide structural reforms that will generate even greater savings for Medicare and other payers than the official projections indicate. The Doing What Works project at the Center for American Progress, Washington, D. C, believes that the ACA will deliver cost savings and more efficient use of taxpayer dollars as it is implemented around the country over the next several years. CAP is confident that the new health care law significantly improves the medium-term fiscal position of Medicare, and points the way toward more significant changes in the U.S. health care system over the longer term - changes that will improve the efficiency and quality of care in the 21 st century. 
