2009941 Picturesque Somes Sound, which neatly bisects Mt. Desert Island and has a well-protected harbor at its north end, is one of Maine 's most coveted cruising destinations. It was in these beautiful granite-and-pine surroundings that I had an opportunity to run hull number one of the new MJM 34Z. This is the first powerboat from Bob Johnstone, who is a founder and president of J-Boats, a successful family of sailboats. This Downeast cruiser with its striking, traditional style came off the drawing board of naval architect Doug Zurn, but it was named for someone close to Johnstone 's heart, his wife, Mary. MJM is an unofficial acronym for Mary Johnstone 's Motorboat, and it will please those who have a penchant for sweet lines and an elegant tumblehome. This boat is intended for day trips, weekend cruises and longer vacations. It 's targeted for those who are downsizing from either a power or sailboat, particularly those who want the convenience of a smaller craft that does n't take half a day 's prep to leave the dock. The layout is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 's a U-shaped dinette with a table that drops down to form a king-size berth. Across from it is an entertainment center that includes a 22-inch flat-screen TV with DVD-player and Sirius-ready Clarion stereo. The standard Freedom 30 inverter and optional generator supply 120-volt A.C. power for the entertainment center, air conditioner, microwave and electric cooktop. The Seafrost top-loading refrigerator, adopted from sailboat designs, is 12-volt D.C.-powered. An enclosed head compartment with shower is also included. In the pilothouse, there 's 6 ' 6 " of headroom at the helm. What I like most about this area is the design of the side " windows. " They are taller than usual, and create an open feel in the pilothouse. The windows are fitted with Strataglass coverings that can be rolled up when you need more ventilation, or snapped down for protection from spray and rain. Steps on either side of the cockpit lead to the sidedecks, which are covered with nonskid. Ample grabrails make it easy for you to go forward. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ they are mounted up on the hardtop, along with antennas for the radar, GPS and satellite radio. A low-profile windlass and 316 stainless steel bowsprit contain the chromed Lewmar claw anchor. Though the style of the 34Z is definitely eye-catching, and the interior features well thought out, it 's the construction and drivetrain system that I found most notable. The hull, built by Boston Boatworks, is a modified-V design with a sharp entry and noticeable bow flare, plus dual lifting strakes, chine flats and an 18-degree deadrise at the transom. The prop pockets allow for an eight-degree angle on the shaft, which makes for better efficiency along with excellent shoal draft. The hull is a post-oven-cured, high-tech composite of epoxy-impregnated E-glass and Kevlar-cored vacuum laminate. It 's one reason the entire boat weighs less than 11,000 pounds with a full load. A solid fiberglass centerline keel and chines with structural grid will minimize the effects of a grounding. The test boat was equipped with a single 440-hp Yanmar diesel inboard. According @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to a speed of 23.5 knots at about 2400 rpm, where it will burn 12 gph and yield a range of approximately 264.4 nautical miles( assuming a 10-percent fuel reserve). Thanks to a beam that 's almost 11 feet, the 34Z offers a smooth ride. When I ran Mary Johnstone 's Motorboat, I thought the experience felt more like flying. The response from the stainless destroyer wheel was immediate, and the boat gently banked in turns. On the straightaway, it tracked true, even when I took my hands off the wheel. This single-screw boat will pivot 360 degrees within its own length, and close-quarters maneuvering is no problem, as I found out when backing out of the Northeast Harbor Marina. But the best feature of this hull is its dryness. With 20-knot winds charging down the sound from the north, we took no water on board, not even spray. Aside from the pilothouse model I tested, the 34Z also is available as an express version with a soft top @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ out there. The selection of equipment offered with the boat is impressive and of the highest quality ; it reflects the builder 's and the designer 's years of cruising experience. The list of standard items even includes a full complement of electronics. This is truly a turnkey craft with sensational looks. MJM 's new 34Z is one of the most imaginative boats I have seen in quite a while. Specifications : LOA Table <p> 
