2036341 // It was the spring of 1993 and the country 's conservative leaders knew they needed a clever strategy to win back the White House. The Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation, which gives about $20 million a year, largely to right-wing causes, had put William Kristol, a prominent Republican strategist, in charge of plotting a future for the conservative movement. The Republicans ' family values mantra had failed to win the presidency, and now they needed a new vocabulary to talk about social issues. The architect of Dan Quayle 's family values message, Kristol managed to attract a host of top-level " profamily " activists to a closed-door meeting held in a Washington, D.C., hotel. A lot of money was riding on this meeting. The outcome would help the Bradley Foundation decide how to invest its vast resources in support of the conservative cause. At about the same time, John Spearing was fast becoming one of Colorado 's most disgruntled parents. Spearing, a district manager for Burger King and president of the Pueblo, Colorado, school board, had been @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ My daughter went to school and reported me, " Spearing said in a recent interview, his voice still trembling with rage. " I had yelled at her and picked her up and brought her in the other room. She told me she did n't have to listen to me anymore. " Spearing insists that he did not strike her, but the responses she gave on a districtwide self-esteem test were used against him to substantiate allegations of abuse. The charges were eventually dropped-but not forgotten. The combination of Spearing 's angry talk and conservatives ' strategizing laid the groundwork for a new rightwing battlefront. Economist Jeffrey Bell, former presidential campaign coordinator for then-Representative Jack Kemp( R.-N.Y.), gave the movement a name. Believing Republicans could regain control of the nation 's political agenda by tapping into parents ' deep-seated dissatisfaction with the public education system, Bell arrived at Kristol 's Washington, D.C., meeting with a new conservative battle cry : " parental rights. " Conveniently, Bell had already set up a vehicle @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and several economist friends had launched Of the People, a lobbying group that planned to push a parental rights amendment in all 50 states. The amendment simply states : " The rights of parents to direct the upbringing and education of their children shall not be infringed. " When conservative activists last year chose Colorado as the site of their first full-scale campaign to net parental rights legislation on a statewide ballot, they recruited Spearing. " Children need to learn how to read and write, " he told a crowd clustered at the state capitol to kick off the ballot drive. " They need to get off this psychological crap. " Legislators in 28 states have already introduced parental rights amendments, according to Of the People. Meanwhile, a Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act is wending its way through Congress, with the backing of 139 members, the Christian Coalition, and Republican presidential hopeful Bob Dole. Proponents claim such legislation is needed because school nurses are handing out condoms, guidance counselors are advising children on personal @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ homosexuality-all without parental permission. Moreover, they claim social workers are removing children from homes because they disapprove of how their parents punish them. he right-wing movers and shakers left Kristol 's 1993 meeting giddy about the prospects for this new movement. Some predicted it would sweep the country. " Parents " rights could be as significant as the 1970s taxpayer revolt, " Kristol said at the time. Christian Coalition Executive Director Ralph Reed told the Washington Times : " I 'd put the parental rights movement today where term limitation was in 1989 and where tax reform was in 1977. But the world inside the Beltway is not paying attention, and it 's going to Ret caught. " Soon after the meeting, a $125,000 check from the Bradley Foundation arrived at the Of the People Foundation. Suddenly, the movement had money, a message, and influential supporters. Now all it lacked was some hard evidence proving it was needed. Sheila Marie Sumey 's story provided the " proof. " She was only 12 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 1975. Soon the Tacoma, Washington, teenager was smoking pot, running away from home and hitch-hiking crosscountry. Police had once picked her up in Indiana. Washington state officials removed Sumey from her home when she was in her mid-teens and placed her in a foster home. But by her eighteenth birthday, she 'd already had one miscarriage and two abortions. The moral of this story, insist parental rights advocates, is that too much government intervention can have disastrous consequences. Sumey, who now lives in Florida with her husband and two children, told Focus on the Family Citizen, a magazine of the Christian Right, " A lot of it could have been prevented if I was made to stay home and listen to my parents-and get the upbringing that I rightly deserved. " Parental rights proponents have recycled Sumey 's story in hearings before Congress, in a Washington Times article, and in a cautionary tale told in the Christian Coalition 's Contract with the American Family. The man behind this wave of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ago presented the Sumey case before the Washington state legislature and headed the Washington state chapter of the Moral Majority. everal months ago, propping his head in his hands and leaning forward on his desk at the Home School Legal Defense Association, a Virginia-based organization he founded, Farris explained why he is helping the parental rights movement. " Sheila Sumey thought smoking marijuana and sleeping with her boyfriend was more important than obeying her parents, " he says, " and the state of Washington agreed with her. " When Farris insists that parental rights legislation would have prevented tragedies like Sumey 's, he sounds convinced. But an analysis of Sumey 's case by Howard Davidson, head of the American Bar Association Center on Children and the Law in Washington, D.C., reveals how carefully chosen the facts in Sumey 's story are. According to Davidson, state officials did not remove her from her home simply because she did not like her parents ' rules, but because her parents could n't prevent her from endangering herself @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ parental rights proponents are publicizing. Most are based on lawsuits brought by parents who, if the legislation were enacted, would stand a better chance of winning. One suit claims that a high school guidance counselor in Georgia drove two teenagers to a clinic to obtain birth control without notifying their parents. Another charges that, without parental permission, Massachusetts high school students attended an AIDS assembly during which a comedian talked about masturbation. Stripped of any nuance or complexity, these anecdotes are reduced to only a few supposedly shocking details that are easily rememberedand repeated. " They tend to use a couple of cases involving either condom distribution or some kind of overly intrusive social service agency as if this is a major problem around the country, " says Reverend Barry Lynn, who, as head of Americans United for Separation of Church and State, often debates parental rights activists. The legislation is " designed to give parents, primarily conservative parents, veto power over anything in the curriculum that bothers them. " Lynn adds @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ consider controversial encompasses almost everything outside the Pvthaiorean theorem. " Lynn is part of a national, 66-member coalition. The membership-which includes the Child Welfare League of America, the National PTA, and Planned Parenthoodranges from left wing to mainstream and reflects the widespread fear triggered by parental rights legislation. These critics charge that the legislation would give parents veto power over entire school curricula, making teaching even more onerous and dragging school systems into costly legal battles. They also maintain that it could threaten teenagers ' access to counseling, birth control, and abortion by stipulating that they must first obtain parental permission. And many fear that by making it easier for angry parents to file lawsuits, the legislation could deter teachers and social workers from reporting child abuse. Inside Of the People 's national headquarters in Arlington, Virginia, are three men, two women, and a fax machine. Scattered about the office are newspaper clippings about parental rights, copies of the organization 's eightpage newsletter, and charts tracking the amendment 's status @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Erken, Of the People 's 33-year-old executive director, spoke earnestly about his organization and the event that sparked its founding : the 1992 feud in New York City over a proposed multicultural school curriculum that included the controversial book Heather Has Two Mommies. " What struck a lot of people here in the Beltway was that it was n't a bunch of rightwing Christian folks, " Erken says. " The revolt was really led from the bottom up. It was a coalition of these Archie Bunker whites and Hispanics and African Americans out in the boroughs, and they are probably relatively apolitical. But when it comes to their own kids, all of a sudden they go, Wait a minute, these are my kids you 're feeding this stuff to. And you 're telling me my values do n't matter. ' A lot of people woke up nationally and said, Whoa, there 's something going on out there. ' It strikes a chord across religious lines, racial lines, class lines, and party @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is far from fulfilled. From its inception, Of the People 's leadership has been all white and virtually all male. The group boasts a five-member board with no women. However, it did pick a woman earlier this year to be its national cochair : Betsy DeVos, chair of the Michigan Republican party and an Amway heir. By now, Erken has had a lot of experience defending his organization against the criticism that parental rights advocates are pushing this legislation as a way to seize control of school curricula. His defense? " If we had some kind of stealth agenda or only wanted some parents involved, the last thing we would do is try to put this language on a statewide ballot so everyone gets a crack at it. " Proponents are apparently unfazed by the possibility that liberals, who are notorious for being far less organized than conservatives, will seize on this legislation to promote their own agenda. t its heart, the parental rights movement is about frustration with the public education system. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Parents of all political stripes can relate to stories of feeling powerless in the face of unresponsive teachers and administrators-whether they have gone to their child 's school to complain about math standards or condom distribution. With carefully crafted rhetoric, proponents of parental rights aim to widen their movement 's appeal and blur the distinction between curriculum politics and the quality of public education. This strategy is a shrewd one. Nevertheless, there is little evidence so far that the movement has succeeded in attracting supporters from outside its core of conservative activists. Despite their claims that parental rights are under assault nationwide, the movement 's leaders have no horror stories of their own to tell. " To be honest, " says Of the People 's founder, Jeffrey Bell, " I have n't had any bad experiences in the schools my children have attended. " The father of four, Bell sends his kids to parochial school. Michael Farris has nine children, seven of whom are school-age and taught at home by his wife. Though @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is trampling parental rights, she says, " I have not personally experienced it. " She adds that she is " fortunate enough " to be able to send two of her four children to private school. The other two are home-schooled. For his part, Greg Erken is unmarried and has no children. So what exactly is driving the parental rights movement? Not just a desire to ban sex ed, but an obsession with preserving the " traditional family. " Erken insists that the amendment is " a statement that the family matters. " He adds, " Maybe the husband and wife will look at each other across the breakfast table, reading about the parental rights amendment, and say, You know, maybe we ought to take a look at how we 're raising our children, how much time we spend with them, how much we sacrifice, and what our priorities are. " ' ne thing both sides agree on is that the vaguely worded legislation would lead to a flurry of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ increase in litigation in the short term. " Parental rights critics argue that this increase in litigation would sap the already scarce resources of schools and child protection agencies. Of the People 's amendment has yet to pass a single state legislature. Despite Kristol 's 1993 strategizing, parental rights has not emerged as a presidential campaign issue. And at press time, the Colorado crowd is scrambling to get the 54,000 signatures needed for its ballot initiative. It is unlikely that the federal bill will reach the floor of either house of Congress this year. Slowing down the process is resistance from a surprising source : the National Right to Life Committee, which insists that the bill, unless amended, could permit parents to coerce their pregnant daughters into aborting. Though convincing voters that parents are a victimized group in need of special protections will be a hard sell, parental rights is a wily movement worth watching. Ms. Author Affiliation Jennifer Gonnerman is a contributing writer at the " Village Voice. " // <p> 
