4084141 Survival show-offs, Heavey 's healing powers, oil anger, and what Megan Fox can teach us about ballistics It is about time that someone commented on the wilderness " reality " TV shows. I just finished " Death by Survival "( Survival, Sept. 2010), in which Keith McCafferty tells the story of Richard Code, the would-be survivalist who died in the wilderness. The antics shown in Bear Grylls 's Man vs. Wild in particular are just plain foolish. From pole-vaulting down a mountainside to jumping into unknown water hazards, the show is basically one dangerous and risky display after another. It is extremely misleading about how to survive if stranded or lost in the wilderness. While most readers of your magazine no doubt realize this, there are probably many people, including kids, who could put themselves in great danger if they followed these examples. Gene Conley, Charlotte, Mich. I am another survival specialist who is saddened by the story covered in " Death by Survival. " Survival is n't something you go out and " do. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and a big difference between what works and what is too risky. Justin Otte, Bozeman, Mont. Quite disappointing when a socalled survival expert, Mr. Mc- Cafferty, uses a tragedy such as Mr. Code 's as an excuse to disparage the accomplishments and name of Bear Grylls. Perhaps McCafferty should channel his jealousy of Mr. Grylls 's success in another, more productive way. Steven Gaffke, via e-mail KEITH MCCAFFERTY RESPONDS : I greatly enjoy both Survivorman and Man vs. Wild, but the latter for entertainment value only. I agree with Mr. Conley and Mr. Otte that Mr. Grylls 's behavior is foolhardy and would put anyone who emulates him in great danger. As for disparaging Mr. Grylls 's name, as Mr. Gaffke suggests I have done, I would reply that his name among any serious survivalists has already long been disparaged. Handing It to Heavey After what has been a very stressful period in my life, Bill Heavey 's column, " Gear Good! "( A Sportsman 's Life), @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Hunter, Lincolnshire, England High Gear I just finished reading the Gear of the Year issue and can only say, " Wow. " All that gear is doubtless the best there is, but perhaps you should have read Bill Heavey 's article " Gear Good! " again before you went to print. As a normal guy, with a normal job, I find it kind of hard to justify thousand- dollar shotguns, rifles, or bows. I would humbly suggest next year you address the best value of gear for the dollar spent or re-title the issue " gear for rich folks. " Randy Nordhagen, Altus, Okla. I was really excited when I saw the cover of the September issue, but it left me disappointed. I 'm a graduate student living on a budget, and my eyes immediately fell on the price tags of the Best of the Best and the other recommended gear. I could n't begin to afford the items on the list. I need articles that advise me how @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, and money I have. Jacob McNutt, Nashville, Tenn. Owning Up to the Oil Bob Marshall 's story on the oil in the Gulf and damage to the environment, " The Oil 's Toll "( Conservation), is like so many others we 've been seeing over the past few months by media and " gurus " howling about the future. We all know what the problem is and that generations will be required for nature to help cure it. But no one seems to be offering a solution. Richard C. Martin, Alexandria, Va. We need to put BP on notice that its share of the cleanup is 100 percent and includes good deeds such as restocking programs and a plan to put the Gulf back to where it was before the spill. The environmental damage to the Gulf is far greater than $20 billion. There is no free lunch for those who destroy the environment. K. Gil, Bennington, Utah Weight Problems I was perusing my husband 's copy of the magazine @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ " Shooting Words "( Rifles). David, you have erred. In the article, you say that sectional density is a bullet 's " weight-to-length ratio, " which you explain by comparing Rosie O'Donnell with Megan Fox. Sectional density is weight divided by diameter squared. So it 's not how tall Rosie and Megan are that matters- it 's their diameters. If all we know is that Rosie and Megan are the same length, then Megan could well have a greater sectional density( bless her heart) than Rosie! Denise Lalonde, Ontario, Canada DAVID E. PETZAL RESPONDS : Your statement of the formula for sectional density is correct, but I 'll put it into even simpler terms : If Rosie and Megan were fired from cannons, Rosie would retain her velocity for a much greater distance. And in any event, thinking about Megan Fox in terms of sectional density is not the best way to think of Megan Fox. 
