2022741 Being on time, within budget, and to specification can be difficult. As one project manager explained, " You can have it fast, cheap, or good. Pick two. " EACH YEAR, an estimated 10 trillion dollars is spent on projects around the world, many of which fail. In fact, there hardly is a company that is satisfied with its project performance. By some measures, two-thirds or more new product, technology, and merger projects fail to meet expectations. Why, given the high rate of failure, do companies keep trying? Surely, there must be an easier way to earn a living. People have been taking on projects for thousands of years. Long before project management software. Earned Value Analysis, and Gantt charts, Egyptians were building pyramids, Romans aqueducts, and Americans and Canadians transcontinental railroads. We keep starting projects for the simple reason that things have to get done. Needs must be met. Greater value always is sought. Behind every project stands a core objective- " why " it should be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ project meets that objective and produces the intended value. It is critical to understand that whatever projects an organization decides to undertake reflect prior decisions as to the best way to meet a need. For example, launching a new product is just one way to increase market share ; merging two companies is one method of advancing company strategy ; redesigning a process is one of many ways to reduce costs or raise quality. In most cases, there are a number of alternative projects that will meet a company 's objectives, and the one that management decides to undertake simply is the one that appears to be the best choice at the time. In the world of projects, success begins with picking the right ones. Consider the U.S. invasion of Iraq. A plan to overthrow Saddam Hussein carefully was thought out and executed. His regime fell ; the U.S. captured Baghdad and American troops now are trying to maintain the peace. If its goal simply had been to oust a dictator, the project would have been a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to achieve greater stability in the region and make the world safer from terrorist attacks, the project, thus far. has been unsuccessful-although it is far from over. Moreover, if this was the goal, it raises two important questions. Was the implemented project plan really the best alternative for creating the desired result? Should the project plan have been modified as it came up against reality? History will be the final judge. For now, it is left to leaders, generals, pundits, and the public to debate. Likewise, if an organization undertakes a project to install an enterprise customer relationship management system, the success of that project will not be defined as " installing X number of workstations, networked with Y number of servers, running Z number of configured software modules at some predetermined level of performance. " Success will be defined first by whether that project was the right choice to meet the organization 's business objectives, and second by the quality of the countless decisions that need to be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it, whom to assign work to, how risk should be managed, and how to respond to the challenges that arise during implementation. Choosing the right projects on which to work requires understanding the organization 's needs. Every project should, in some way, address one or more of three strategic needs by adding market share, size, or margin. That 's it Any project, whether it is acquiring a company, launching a product, reducing cost, increasing customer satisfaction, raising employee retention, upping shareholder value, or even landscaping corporate headquarters, can, and should, be tied to one of these three core areas. Placed within that perspective, it is much easier to see and evaluate the range of available options. Are growing market share, size, and margin equally important to your organization? They may be, but not likely. Every company has a strategy that is best for them, and that strategy often changes over time. For companies such as eBay, the priority, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ online auctions. Raising margins or raising the share of a market that was unknown only a few years ago does not make much sense. Likewise, JetBlue 's growth strategy comes from achieving market share through low prices and a differentiated customer experience. JetBlue also knows that it can grow the market for nonbusiness travel if it can lower the cost enough to tempt people who would not otherwise travel for pleasure to do so. So, any project at JetBlue should, in some way, even if it is just tangentially, support the goal of raising margins so that prices can be lowered and making travel on JetBlue much more than a ride in an airborne cattle car. Some will argue that aircraft maintenance or flight-attendant safety training projects do not support this strategy. They are undertaken as regulatory necessity. While that is true, penalties and government actions add costs that impact ticket prices. More importantly, a differentiated customer experience will not be very successful as a strategy if that difference also includes the fear of not @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the first job of the project manager-to be aware of how any given project supports the organization 's strategic goals. Without this knowledge, it is almost impossible to make the correct decisions on project priority, investment, or design. A lack of attention to this relationship is at the root of many project failures. All too often, an organization will assess a project in midstream or, worse, at completion, remarking that it is on time, on budget, and flawlessly executed. Then, too late, they will realize that it does not really meet a need-or, if it does, it is apparent that there were other, simpler and less expensive ways to meet that need. It is not enough for the project manager to be aware of the strategic connection. Every member of the team has to understand the " why " behind the project-the desired business results suggested directly or indirectly by the strategy. They must know the answer to the question : At the end of the project, what @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ an NT server " is not a proper answer. " Five percent improved customer retention via reduced call center wait time " is the type of target they need to be aiming for. To the degree that the team appreciates the endgame and knows exactly what " on strategy " means, they will be able to bring the right information to the right decisions when defining and planning the project. They also will be better able to protect the project 's goal when faced with the cold reality of implementation. Even when they are aligned perfectly with the organization 's strategic goals, many projects fail because there is an assumption that they somehow will be implemented, as if by magic. Like a shopper on a buying spree forgetting how the credit card bills will be paidor even how all the stuff will fit in the carthe organization 's leaders often fail to plan resource deployment so projects do not bump into each other or have teams squabble over common resources. The key to effective resource allocation is the prioritization of projects @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ strategic value. That means not just evaluating each project 's expected net present value and return on investment, but comparing its impact on the strategy. What is it worth to the company if it makes this much progress against the strategy? Where is the strategy telling us to look for value in terms of desired market share, market size, and margin? What is it saying about how best to achieve increases in these areas? Then, using this common measuring stick, how does the value of this project compare with that of other proposed projects? The output is a rank order of projects according to their value. A comparison of the benefits of all proposed projects is the first step in the prioritization process ; the second is an evaluation of each project in terms of risk. What are the specific associated threats and how likely are they? Even more important, what can be done to reduce the probability of these threats? What can we do now to lessen the impact of the threats if @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ on balance, should be compared to its risk. Does this project produce enough benefit to accept this risk? Decisionmakers will answer yes or no depending on the degree to which they are risk tolerant or risk averse. Their assessment also may vary with time. Viewed within the context of the collective risk of other projects in the portfolio, they may decide that, while it is important, a particular project should be delayed until a less risky time. Projects quickly can outstrip available cash flow. Bottlenecks can bring all projects to a grinding halt, as teams battle over a critical resource. To avoid these common threats, each of the proposed projects needs to be fully defined, using a standardized approach, before final decisions are made. The proposed scope and cost of the work must be delineated, so it can be compared to available resources. Simple modeling quickly will illustrate how far down the project list an organization can go before the work stops or slows. At that point, it is a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, while putting lowerpriority projects on hold until additional resources can be found. If projects really are a collection of decisions about which needs must be met and how best to meet them, then an organization 's projects will move at a glacial pace if decisionmaking is not pushed down to the lowest levels. Once a project gets underway, countless decisions must be made. What will be the steps in the project? Who will be responsible for each? How will they report on their progress? How will they avoid problems during implementation? What will they do if problems do occur? How will the organization leverage learning that results from the project ' '. ' These and countless other choices are critical for success, but that does not mean they all should all be made by the " important " people. Not only would that be too slow but, in many cases, these important people have neither the information nor the technical skills to make these choices. Any decision requires two things to be successful @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ implement it fully. Often, those higher up in the organization can not provide either. Pressure cooker If a project is particularly critical or competitive pressure is high, it probably will be necessary to harness the organization 's best thinking when making decisions relating to the project plan. To the degree that you need the most creative, most technically talented people-or those who just have the facts-you have to involve them in these tactical decisions. Knowing what to do and doing it are two very different things. Given all the pressures and distractions to which people are subject at work, the project team needs to be committed fully. Commitment means doing whatever is necessary to see it through. Pushing aside competing priorities, enduring short-term hardships to gain long-term returns, and perhaps sacrificing personal time are increasingly the currency of project commitment. Just as knowing and doing are different things, asking for and gaining commitment are not the same, either. By involving the entire team in the project-definition and -planning stage, managers significantly can @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ appreciation for, and commitment to, the business goals of the project. The quality of a project is defined by how well it meets a customer 's needs or objectives. That usually includes being on time, within budget, and to specification. However, these are indicators of project efficiency, not quality. Meeting these indicators is far less important than achieving the project 's core objective. What 's more, these three indicators never can be equally important to the customer ; one or, at most, two of the three measures must take precedence. It may be that having the product meet specifications is so critical that the buyer does not care if it is delivered late or costs more than expected-or perhaps the timetable is so tight that, if the work is a little off spec, it is preferable to taking extra time to get it exactly right. As a project manager once put it, " You can have it fast, cheap, or good. Pick two. " Perhaps the greatest @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and performance is that they are lagging indicators. You only become aware that you are underperfonning after you have fallen behind schedule, gone over budget, or seen quality slip. Surely, these measures deserve to be watched closely but, in our experience, it is much more valuable to look at available leading indicators of project quality. Perhaps the best indicators relate to how well the members of the project team are working together. Do they have the right knowledge and skill to make sound choices, go after issues as soon as they surface and stay on them until they are resolved, have a sound process for resolving issues, and confront conflict directly? Are their choices consistent with the strategy and goals? Does each team member hold himself or herself accountable to meet commitments? Do they hold others accountable? Are those commitments and progress against them visible to all involved? Affirmative answers to these questions often are the single most accurate predictor of project success, regardless of the whether or not hidden threats materialize @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Nearly every project begins with optimism, or at least the belief that it is worth trying. Project team members may have their doubts but, if they agree to work on the project, they generally support it. Truly rare is the individual who deliberately works to sabotage the team 's project. Everyone has the best intentions, but reality has a way of intruding. A project team 's performance is only as good as the performance system within which the team operates. So, if the team is not performing as expected, begin the search for causes and corrective actions with an examination of the performance environment. The performance system is made up of all the factors within and around employees that influence their behavior. To assess how well your organization 's performance system supports project teams and their members, managers should ask themselves a series of questions about their people and the environment in which they are expected to produce results. How well suited are the team members to the project? Do they have the necessary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @? Have they been given adequate time to understand and plan the work properly? Are they given adequate time and resources to do the work? Have distractions and interference been removed? On balance, do the benefits they receive for participating in the project outweigh the burden put on them? Are there appropriate, well-understood consequences for positive and negative behaviors? What feedback do team members get about their contribution? How timely is it? These and other questions related to the performance system will help identify factors that encourage the team behaviors needed for success-and those that discourage them. The circumstances surrounding project teams may never be perfect, but it is the responsibility of the manager and, ultimately, of top management, to ensure that the performance environment is as well managed as possible. Not all projects are created equal. Too many organizations fail to screen proposed projects against strategic criteria, set priorities, and plan the use of shared resources. The systematic evaluation of projects makes it easy to identify those that yield the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ those that meet the litmus test of strategic acceptability can be increased dramatically by paying attention to a few critical factors, such as engaging the brainpower of your most knowledgeable employees, regardless of job title : establishing-and gaining agreement on-clear goals and quality measures ; gauging project success by leading, not lagging, indicators and, if necessary, making midcourse corrections : and aligning the performance system to support positive behavior by project teams and the individuals who comprise them. In today 's complex, fiercely competitive environment, every job is a thinking job. This especially is true of project work. Project success hinges on carefully thinking through every aspect of the job-from core objectives to dayto-day implementation to ongoing measurement of progress and results. Sidebar " Nearly every project begins with optimism, or at least the belief that it is worth trying. " Author Affiliation Andrew Graham is partner and chief operating officer of Kepner-Tregoe, Inc.. Philadelphia, Pa., an international business consulting fmn. Andrew Longman, partner and vice president of marketing at @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ A Thinking Team 's Guide to Getting Work Done. // <p> 
