4051641 QUALITY TIME : It 's the holy grail of modern parenthood. Mothers and fathers everywhere agree that it 's essential for shaping a child 's character, strengthening family bonds, and insuring against multiple facial piercing. But beyond such generalities, there 's a surprising lack of consensus about its nuances. Is there a difference, for instance, between spending quality time and just spending time? And as children approach young adulthood, does the opportunity for quality time start to run out? I do n't have a doctorate in any of this, but I did recently conduct some intensive research. Through a massive stroke of good fortune, I landed a teaching job on a cruise ship that visited 45 countries in 109 days-and I took my 18-year-old daughter, Claire, along as my guest. We threw snowballs in Antarctica. We learned to surfin the Indian Ocean, and we touched the pyramids, the Wailing Wall, and Jesus 's tomb. We comforted each other after a robbery in Cape Town, and damn near got arrested in Athens one muggy afternoon. Indeed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ most parents ever will. What I learned is that it 's still possible to connect with your kids years after the bedtime stories have been tucked in. And you do n't even have to book a world cruise to do so. Here, a few lessons from our 3 months of together time : BE THE BOSS. Teenagers are indecisive. They spend their days in the land of I Do n't Know. My daughter initially turned up her nose at the offer of an around-the-world trip. She said she 'd never be able to finish high school early( she did) and that she 'd miss her friends too much( she did n't). So I forced her to go. Well, maybey forced is too strong a word. I told her it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to meet cute Brazilian guys and generally lie around doing nothing. IF YOU WANT QUALITY, GO FOR QUANTITY. The mere fact that I was with my daughter for such a long stretch guaranteed we 'd have some special @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, but it 's simple and effective. The mistake parents often make is not spending enough overall time with their kids, then trying to make what little time they do share memorable. That 's a much harder shot to pull off. Relax. Just hang out. DO MORE, TALK LESS. Quality time, from a teenager 's point of view, is never going to involve a mellow evening of conversation in the parlor. They prefer doing to being. In Walvis Bay, Namibia, along the coast of Africa, we rented sea kayaks instead of just lounging on the beach. We unexpectedly paddled into a large group of seals, who proceeded to play with our sleek shells as if we were long-lost members of the herd. My daughter and I never said a word to each other while it was happening, but this is one of our fondest memories. Doing things together, even if you are doing them separately, is powerful glue. TREAT THEM LIKE ADULTS... Kids want nothing @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ any moment in which their maturity is recognized. Claire and I went to dinner one night on the ship- just us, freed from our usual table of eight. It was a formal evening, so I was in a tuxedo, and she was bejeweled and beautiful. We talked about the trip ; then we talked about life.( She admitted being apprehensive about college but said she was looking forward to the parties.) She opened up, and I realized the importance of treating my baby like a young lady. BUT WALK IN THEIR FLIP-FLOPS. I did n't want to be in Rio de Janeiro 's famed Sambdromo at 3 am during Carnival surrounded by drunken, shirtless Brazilians while being pummeled by a sound system that could be heard in Argentina. But Claire did. When a teenager momentarily emerges from the land of I Do n't Know and invites you into her world, never think you 're too old or tired. Instead, seize the moment( and down a Red Bull if you have @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Olympic Stadium in Ath- ens, gazing reverently at the track where the first modern marathon fin- ished in 1896. Claire and I are runners, and the temptation was too great : We clambered over the fence and took off, jog- ging at first, then gradu- ally extending our strides into a full sprint. We were lost in the glory of it all, imagining the applause. But instead of laurels awaiting us at the end, there was a security guard who charged us with violating an antiquity. Fortunately, our guide intervened. A parent 's biggest job is to instill a sense of right and wrong. But once a child has a solid respect for the rules, the thrill of occasionally breaking some together can outweigh the agony of, say, a rap sheet. LET GO A LITTLE. The cruise was scheduled to conclude just in time for Claire 's prom, so she wanted to buy a gown in some exotic townBuenos Aires, it turns out. I had n't shopped for dresses @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ let the boutique owner take over. When Claire emerged from the dressing room, she was sporting a backless blue satin gown with a plunging neckline. Although that dress did n't match the vision I had of my little girl, I bought it anyway. Letting your kids pursue their dreams makes you a part of them. GIVE ' EM SOME SPACE. One day, my daughter and I were sunning on the deck. An older man tottered over, squinted down at us, and said : " You 're such a lovely couple ; I hope you enjoy your honeymoon. " His eyesight probably did n't register the age difference, but my daughter gagged on her iced tea and from then on, sat two chairs down from mine. So yes, it is possible to spend too much quality time together. Fortunately, you can just do what we did and create a little quality space. 
