2014541 Send your health questions to : " Ask Doctor Cory, " Children 's Digest, RO. Box 567, Indianapolis, IN 46206. This column does not replace your doctor 's advice. Dear Dr. Cory : My mom is always saying, " Quit eating carrots. How about some broccoli or lettuce? " Can you really turn orange if you eat too many carrots? Christa Hunter New Haven, Indiana Dear Christa : Eating too many carrots( or other yellow vegetables) can cause your skin to turn yellow, a harmless condition called carotenemia( kare-uh-tehNEE-mee-uh) that comes from eating vegetables with lots of carotenoid( kareOT-n-oid) pigments. You 'd have to eat twelve carrots or ten sweet potatoes every day for several weeks before this could happen. When you stopped eating the vegetables, your skin would return to normal in a few weeks. Your mother is probably trying to encourage you to eat a well-rounded diet. Carrots are very good for you because they are low in calories and fat and have lots of potassium, vitamin A, and folic acid @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ minerals you need, you should eat other fruits and vegetables, too. Remember, at least five servings a day of fruits and vegetables is the minimum amount your body needs to work better and last longer. Dear Dr. Cory : Why do we have tonsils? Mine get swollen and red whenever I get sick. They really hurt and I ca n't breathe very well. My friend had this trouble and had her tonsils taken out. If you can have tonsils taken out, why do you have them in the first place? Christina Mo Danville, California Dear Christina : Tonsils are part of the lymphatic( limFAT-ik) system which helps your body fight infections. They contain white blood cells that battle infections that enter the mouth by food or by air. Tonsils help keep the infection in the throat rather than letting it spread to other parts of the body. Usually large in childhood, tonsils reach their maximum size when the person is about eight. Then they gradually shrink. Adults ' tonsils are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ your tonsils if : you get repeated strep throat infections ; you get other throat infections that do n't clear up with antibiotic medicines ; your tonsils stay so large that they interfere with swallowing or breathing. A word of caution : Removing tonsils does not eliminate sore throats. In the past we removed tonsils too often, thinking the child( or adult) would never get another infection. Dear Dr. Cory : What is a sinus and what is a sinus infection? Karen Pastor Staten Island, New York Dear Karen : A sinus( SY-nus) is one of several large air spaces found in the bones around your nose and eyes. You have eight sinuses-four on each side. Small openings connect each sinus to the nose for drainage. The sinuses are lined with mucous membrane which contains tiny hairs called cilia( SILL-ee-uh). The membrane makes a cleansing fluid called mucus which, with the cilia, helps wash away bacteria, dust, and other particles you inhale. The mucus also moistens the air you @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to lighten the weight of the bones in your skull. But they also act as vibrating chambers when you speak. If you place your hands on your face while making vowel sounds, you can feel your sinuses vibrate. When infected, the sinus lining swells and traps mucus inside your sinuses. Usually, the lining of your nose swells, too, closing off the sinus openings and adding to the drainage problem. Pus and mucus can not escape, and the sinuses become painful from inflammation and the pressure. Sinus infections can be caused by a bacterium, virus, or a fungus. Often you 'll have a cold before a sinus infection develops. Allergies can also lead to sinus infections. Antibiotic medication can be prescribed for sinus infections caused by bacteria. See you next issue! Your friend, Cory SerVaas, M.D. <p> 
