2001741 Janese Swanson and her eightyear-old daughter, Jackie, were watching television during the summer of 1995 when they saw the first ad for a voice-recording toy that they had invented together. They had licensed the product to a toy manufacturer that was now trying to whip up some excitement for the item. On television, a boy held the toy in his hand while a younger girl asked repeatedly for a chance to play with it. He never even looked at her. After 30 seconds, the girl gave up and walked away. Jackie turned to her mother and asked, " Why do they always make the cool toys as if they 're for boys? " forgetting, in her distress, that she had helped create the toy. She had certainly thought of it as something for herself as well as for any of the boys she knew. Swanson knew from her own testing of the product that both girls and boys enjoyed playing with it. But she had licensed it to a company that had its own marketing and advertising strategy. Swanson realized that simply @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ change the preconceptions of toy company executives, retailers, or even parents who still believe that microchips are masculine. She would have to create new images of girls enjoying high-tech activities and new toys for them to do it with. Her existing company, Kid One for Fun, Inc., already had an established identity. Rather than yank it in a new direction, she decided to start a new business, and approach potential investors with a plan and mission. The result is Girl Tech. Kid One for Fun still exists on paper. But Girl Tech is where the action is. The new company employs five full-timers who work together closely-brainstorming concepts for girl-friendly high-tech toys-in a small, sunny suite of offices in downtown San Rafael, California. The core creative team, including the designer and writers, is all-female, all in their twenties and thirties. And Swanson 's now-nine-yearold daughter still contributes ideas and tests prototypes. The company 's goal is to invent technology-based products that are " cool, " easy to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ six and twelve. The easy part has been dreaming up the gadgets. The hard part has been convincing a toy company that girls will buy products that are not pink and fluffy. What do girls want from technological toys? Lots of businessPeople say they would love to know. Only a small number of welldesigned studies have looked into girls ' reactions to high-tech toys and games. The Electronic Games for Education in Math and Science( E-GEMS), a research group at the University of British Columbia, has conducted some of the best studies. During the summer of 1993, E-GEMS members timed and interviewed children playing with video and computer games at Science World British Columbia, a Vancouver science center. They concluded that girls enjoyed electronic games, particularly if they could easily get a turn, if other children or adults kept them company while they played, and if the games included strong story lines and welldeveloped characters. Those results were consistent with Swanson 's own research on children and high-tech games( she has @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ play preferences and technology). After reviewing all the research in the field, Swanson came to believe that although girls ' and boys ' tastes are similar, girls are more likely to play cooperatively and to enjoy a game that has few rules and many ways to win. They are also more likely to dislike seeing characters die during the game. At the same time, Swanson knew that some girls found it difficult to join what they perceived to be the macho culture of video games. In her own review of the research, she had seen that children tend to get approval from their peers when they play in ways that are considered " appropriate " for their sex. When they play in what are considered " cross-sexed " activities they are often criticized or left to play alone. Several big companies that have pondered these research results and done their own studies seem to feel that girlfriendly products are a major challenge. For example, beginning in 1993, Sega of America spent more than $200,000 researching possible @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ titles, Sega gave up, at least temporarily, says Roberta Jacobs, a former general manager for Sega of America, now senior vice president at Viacom New Media. Management could n't see any prospect of a short-term return, says Jacobs. Meanwhile, most of the currently available high-tech games for girls resort to stereotypes. Her Interactive, a division of American Laser Games, released " McKenzie &; Co. " in 1995, in which girls shop for name-brand clothes in a mall, experiment with makeup, and flirt with boys. Mattel Media 's new line of Barbie CDROMs are just as bad : girls print out Barbie stationery or fabric outfits for their own Barbie dolls. At least one other company besides Girl Tech hopes to move beyond those cliches. But Girl Games, Inc., has so far produced only " Let 's Talk About ME! " which lets girls learn about health and personality types, make online pen pals, and read their horoscopes. Swanson, 39, has the knowledge and experience @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ she was more technology-minded than girls are " supposed " to be. " I bought appliances for my mom so I could disassemble them, " she says. She took apart light switches, the family toaster, blender, and tape recorder so she could figure out what made them work. By the time she entered the workforce years later, it was easy to familiarize herself with computers and their workings. From the very beginning, she developed an impressive record of inventing high-tech fun for all kids. At Broderbund Software, she was product manager for award-winning, highly successful computer games, including " Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?, " " Treehouse, " and " The Playroom. " " Carmen Sandiego, " in which children learn geography as they chase a clever thief, not only earned large profits for Broderbund and led to live-action and animated television spin-offs, but was also one of the few early computer games to appeal to both girls and boys. After leaving Broderbund, Swanson founded @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ toys. As at Broderbund, Swanson 's aim was to dream up gender-neutral toys. One of them was the Yak Bak, a palm-sized voice recorder that lets kids distort their voices by changing the playback speed. So far, it has generated over $50 million in retail sales for the manufacturer, YES! Entertainment, says Swanson. But even with her own company, Swanson saw again and again that once a manufacturer bought a product, its gender-neutral orientation was dropped in favor of presenting " boy toys. " Toy company executives regularly asked her to turn her toys and games into ones that appealed mainly to boys. One voicerecording product that she developed hung like a medallion around a child 's neck. In tests, every single girl who tried it wanted one. Most boys liked it, too, but a few said they would n't want to wear it. Swanson was pleased by the kids ' enthusiasm. The toy company was n't. Executives insisted that the toy be redesigned so it would be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ shoot " in order to send messages. Swanson did what the manufacturer wanted, although was n't happy that the company thought it was important for the toy to appeal to boys rather than to girls. There have been many other instances in Swanson 's career when executives chose to shoot video spots that left girls out or insulted them. According to Swanson, one company created a video to persuade its marketing staff that a walkie-talkie toy could be a hot seller. The video was set in a high school and overwhelmingly showed boys using the product. One of the few girls allowed to speak, at the end, managed to say only that the product was a good way to talk to your boyfriend. Swanson has decided to tackle these anti-girl attitudes head-on with Girl Tech. She says she wo n't capitulate again to old-tashioned industry attitudes. Instead, she 's determined to have a contractual provision in all her licensing arrangements that will give her a greater role in the marketing and advertising of her products. So @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Hasbro, Inc., has stepped up to the challenge. This fall, Hasbro executives signed a contract with Girl Tech, adding Swanson 's line of products to such popular games as Scrabble and Monopoly. Hasbro has agreed to market the products in a way that wo n't insult girls ' intelligence. " We are thrilled, " says Linda Halunen, Girl Tech 's sales manager. " We 're bringing out a line of techie gadgets for girls that are so new and mysterious we ca n't even talk about it. " The line, to be marketed under the Girl Tech brand name, is due out early this year. Until then no one is talking about the toys or the company 's marketing strategy for fear that copycat manufacturers will jump in and release " me too " products. What sort of packaging and advertising Hasbro uses to launch the toys is crucial not only for sales, but for Girl Tech 's broader mission : to change people 's attitudes about technology and girls, and to foster @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ have strengthened her conviction that children 's social surroundings shape their ideas about play and themselves. She hopes to use Girl Tech as a force to help change those surroundings. She and her team will develop products in five areas that they say affect children 's attitudes and their perception of the world : the business world ; the family ; schools ; broadcast, recorded, and online media ; and other children. Girl Tech has also developed a Web site, packed with games, opportunities to send messages to other girls, book reviews, and links to Internet sites reviewed by Girl Tech( see http : //www.girltech.com). In February, around the time when Hasbro is set to launch the Girl Tech line, IDG Books Worldwide, publisher of the " for Dummies " series of computer books, will bring out Tech Girl 's Internet Adventures, a guide to more than 200 girl-friendly Internet sites. The book will come with a CD-ROM carrying software that will let girls create their own Web site, which they @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. In addition, says Swanson, she is talking to a major Internet service about creating a girls ' area that would include content and links reviewed by Girl Tech. What about the millions of girls who do n't use the Internet? Swanson is developing projects for movie and television production companies. She 's planning to create a film or TV series starring the adventurous Tech Girl-whose personality and adventures are still top secret, but who will reflect the themes that permeate all of Girl Tech 's work. No matter what the product, or where girls use it, the women at Girl Tech hope that their toys and games will give millions of girls the bone-deep feeling that technology belongs to them. " I 'd like to see us standing tall next to Barbie, " says Swanson. Rhona Mahony is a visiting scholar at Yale Law School. She is writing a book on women and the computer industry and is the author of " Kidding Ourselves : Breadwinning, Babies, and Bargaining Power "( Basic Books @ @ @ 
