2040541 Headnote How 5 National Geographic photographers get the most dangerous shots // 1 PHOTOGRAPHER : Mattias Klum FEAR FACTOR : A king cobra 's bite can be deadly. Mill the fangs hit their mark? PLACE : Ban Khok Sa-nga, Thailand Cornered by a King Cobra! Photographers who shoot for the National Geographic Society often face scary situations and challenging conditions in pursuit of the perfect image. For example, an encounter with a king cobra in Thailand was an exciting challenge for photographer Mattias Klum. " It was the angriest snake I 'd ever seen. The king cobra, star of a village street show, was a fighter in the traditional " sport " of king cobra boxing. King cobras are teased and provoked by their keepers until the snakes strike out at almost anything. " The people who do this do n't think they 're being cruel. They believe they 're in tune with their religion 's spirits. And even though I was n't teasing this snake-I was just standing there photographing the action-I was in quite a bit of danger. " This ten-foot-long king @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ neurotoxin, was suddenly distracted by my movement. He reached out to strike me, but got my camera instead. " Good thing. Venom in a single bite can kill an elephant! 2 PHOTOGRAPHER : Mark Thiessen FEAR FACTOR : Flames and an unexpected wind challenge a photographer who chases wildfires. PLACE : Boise, Idaho Fighting Flames! Facing wildfires is a passion for photographer Mark Thiessen, whose years of experience allow him to get close to firefighters in battle. " Even though fire is very dangerous, I 've usually felt safe shooting firefighters at work. But sometimes things happen that nobody can control-like wind. " I was shooting some firefighters who were using controlled burning to keep a ioo-acre wildfire from spreading. All of a sudden the wind changed direction and the flames started roaring toward us. " I was standing waist-high in the middle of some dry brush shooting pictures when I heard the fireman 's radio squawk, " You guys get out of there, and get that photographer out of therel ' @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ be scared. I only had time to run. I hopped over a barbed wire fence and crossed a ditch. " When I got to safety and looked back to where I 'd been standing, all the dry brush was gone. The fire had crashed in like a tidal wave and taken everything-and it would have taken me, too. " 3 PHOTOGRAPHER : Michael Nichols FEAR FACTOR : Wild elephants demand respect. This photographer keeps that in mind. PLACE : Dzonga, Central African Republic Face-Off With a Charging Elephant! Forest elephants in this area are not used to photographers. They are, however, used to hunters, so humans make them nervous. " The situation seen in this photo-a charging elephant-was my own fault. I really do n't like making pictures like this. I do n't want to portray animals as aggressive when they 're only reacting to my behavior. " I was goofing around, walking along the edge of a clearing. The elephants were spooked by my scent. While an @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ up to scare me away. She stopped 15 yards away ; she 'd made her point. " I never felt I was in danger-from her. But walking back to camp that night was another story. I picked my way through the forest in near total darkness, since flashlight beams bobbing around can anger elephants already suspicious of humans. I knew they were nearby ; I heard crashing and trumpeting sounds through the trees all around me. I just had to hope I was n't going to invade any elephant 's space hiking home. " Luckily he made it back all right. 4 PHOTOGRAPHER : Brian Skerry FEAR FACTOR : Aggressive, fast squids just mean " fun challenge! " to this photographer. PLACE : Sea of Cortez, Mexico Attacked by a Huge Squid! That squid was so strong it could swim away with two people, one scientist warned photographer Brian Skerry. " It was after midnight, and I was 100 feet below the surface of the sea. I had to dive in total @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the shadows came the big, glowing eye of a real live sea monster, the Humboldt squid. It can grow to seven feet long and weigh ioo pounds. It has a strong beak like a parrot 's. Its eight arms are covered with sucker disks lined with 24,000 sharp little teeth. " These squids move so fast you never know where they 'll go next. Sometimes these meateaters came after me aggressively. I could feel the teeth on their tentacles biting into my wet suit. Once a tentacle even tried to snatch my camera, but I jammed the equipment back out at the squid and it finally let go. " I had some fears about getting into the water with the Humboldts, but I went ahead cautiously and got my photos. Very few people ever swam with these monsters. " 5 PHOTOGRAPHER : Garsten Peter FEAR FACTOR : Standing where a tornado is about to strike is awesome. PLACE : near Manchester, North Dakota In the Path of a Twister! Cameras picked up @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ from inside a twister. Placing equipment in the funnel cloud 's path took nerves of steel. " I spent three years trying to get photographs of the inside of a tornado. Finally, success! This big twister formed 60 seconds after I 'd put my equipment in place to shoot a storm. " My cameras were inside a go-pound metal casing, which blew away as if it were a piece of paper. So did an entire farmhouse nearby.( Luckily, the family living there was away.) I could hear trees breaking in the roaring wind. All kinds of stuff was flying through the air. But I was concentrating so hard on my work I did n't think about being frightened. The weather scientists with me kept yelling at me. I was the last one to get into the car, and we sped away from the tornado in the nick of time! " Sidebar I heard the fireman 's radio sqauwk, " Get that photographer out of there! " -MARK THIESSEN // @ 
