4146241 SAMPLINGS # A rare breed of galaxies known as Green Peas might help astronomers understand the evolution of the primordial universe. Back in 2007, the crowdsourced Galaxy Zoo project led to the discovery of galaxies called Green Peas, so named for their small size and greenish appearance in images from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. With their rip-roaring rates of star formation and low levels of heavy elements and dust, the compact Green Peas resemble the earliest galaxies in important ways. Conveniently, Green Peas occur relatively close to us--between 1 billion and 5 billion light-years away--thus making them easier to study than the actual early galaxies, which are more than 13 billion light-years away. # In the modern cosmos, stray intergalactic hydrogen exists only in ionized form--it has been split into a constituent proton and electron, forming plasma, an electrically charged gas. But until several hundred million years after the big bang, non-ionized hydrogen permeated the universe. Astronomers reckon that high-energy radiation spewing out of the first stars and galaxies triggered the " reionization " of the universe. The radiation split intergalactic, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ protons and electrons, as had been the case in the earliest, hotter epochs of the universe. Familiar, developed galaxies, however, do not pour out enough radiation to have caused that reionizing transformation. # Thinking that Green Peas could serve as useful analogs for the earliest galaxies, doctoral student Anne E. Jaskot and professor Sally Oey of the University of Michigan looked at six of the most intensely star-forming Peas known. Such " starbursting " galaxies, explained Jaskot, produce a lot of ionizing radiation. # She and Oey compared the amount of light absorbed and re-emitted by gases within the Green Peas with models of the galaxies ' emitted radiation from nebular and stellar populations. The models call for more radiation than observations show. The implication is that some of their radiation must have indeed escaped from the galaxies. The investigators conclude that Green Pea-like galaxies in the early universe could have been responsible for the reionization process.( Astrophysical Journal) # Montage of six Green Pea galaxies # 
