4074641 For more than a century, RitcheyChrtien( RC) reflectors have been the most common type of telescope installed in professional observatories. The design combines a hyperbolic concave primary mirror with a hyperbolic convex secondary mirror to produce tack-sharp images free of coma, astigmatism, and spherical aberration. Amateur astronomers, however, have been slow to respond to RCs. Because their mirrors have curves that are difficult to figure, RCs can be expensive to make. Recently, Astronomy Technologies( Astro-Tech), based in Norman, Oklahoma, did what many thought was impossible : offer RC optics in an affordable package. The company 's 6-inch f/9 AT6RC includes enhanced aluminum mirrors coated with quartz, a dual-speed Crayford-style focuser, a Vixen-style dovetail rail for attaching the tube to many of todays most popular mounts, and a standard finder scope shoe - all for an amazing $795. The scope does not include a mount, a finder scope, or eyepieces. I supplied my own for this test. It is important to note that Astro-Tech designed the AT6RC specifically for astrophotography using digital singlelens @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ chips. An observer can use it visually, but the real strength behind the RC design is its flat photographic field. This eliminates the " star bloat " that plagues photos taken with many other optical designs. One reason RCs are not as suitable for visual observing as some other designs is their comparatively large central obstructions created by their secondary mirrors. Central obstructions decrease image contrast. The larger the obstruction, the greater the impact. In the case of the AT6RC, the central obstruction measures 3 inches( 7.6 centimeters) across, or 50 percent of the aperture 's diameter. That ratio is noticeably larger than comparably sized SchmidtCassegrain and Maksutov-Cassegrain designs. The AT6RC s enhanced optical coatings offset part of the problem, but visual contrast still will suffer. Astroimagers can correct photographic contrast easily with software during processing, which is why photographers are more concerned with sharpness. High-quality impressions The test scope arrived collimated. Had adjustment been necessary, 1 could have referred to the included instruction sheet to fine-tune the secondary mirror @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ warns, " Do not adjust the six mirror-alignment screws on back of the rear cell as this will void your warranty. " The AT6RC weighs just 13 pounds( 5.9 kilograms) and measures only 19.25 inches( 48.9cm) long, not counting the extension tubes. The fit and finish are excellent. All interior surfaces, including the eight well-designed baffles, are flat black. Proper baffling and blackening are crucial in RCs to keep stray light from infiltrating the optical path. The AT6RC 's Crayford focuser accepts both 1 ' ' and 2 ' ' eyepieces. Both adjustments - the coarse focus and the 10-to-1 reduction fine focus - move smoothly. Every photographer will appreciate the focuser drawtube 's numerical scale, which makes returning to a specific setting easy. A locking screw ensures the focuser wo n't shift. The focuser drawtube has 1.34 inches( 3.4cm) of travel, which alone is not long enough for cameras and eyepieces to focus properly. That 's why the AT6RC comes with two 2 ' ' -long extension @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ tube in place, but for photography, my Canon XTi digital SLR needed a little more out-focus. Together, however, both tubes proved too long. Once I combined my own 1 ' ' extension with one of the supplied 2 ' ' tubes, focusing was easy. Accessory suppliers offer a matching 1 ' ' tubes for less than $35. While the focuser worked smoothly, it sagged slightly under the weight of my Canon XTi. You can minimize the sag by checking that the focuser 's tension screw is tight. If that screw is loose, the drawtube also will move too easily for accurate focusing. Be certain that you screw the focuser and extension tubes together firmly. The focuser rotates, which is handy, but make sure its lock ring is tight. Sky-testing the AT6RC Turning the test scope skyward quickly revealed the first-class quality of its optics. Images stayed crisp beyond 30Ox across the full field of view. Coma, a problem inherent with some catadioptric optical designs, was minimal, as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ resolving small-scale objects, such as globular clusters, lunar features, and closely spaced double stars. My view of the Double Double( Epsilon e Lyrae) especially impressed me. All four stars remained clearly split even when I moved them to the edge of my eyepieces 82 apparent field. More demanding binaries also showed clean splits. A bargain astroimaging tool Whether taking photos of the Moon or deep-sky objects, the AT6RC proves to be a versatile instrument. Its compact size makes it easy to transport, while its aperture is large enough to capture impressive images of a variety of targets. If you are looking to expand into photography and want the benefit of a Richey-Chrtien 's razor-sharp images without breaking the bank, I highly recommend the AT6RC. 
