2008041 A plan for wellness through the decades. // IN 1997 we produced a thirty-page report on all the ways women can stay healthy and active throughout their lives. Since then, the medical landscape has changed considerably. The Women 's Health Initiative, the largest and most comprehensive study on the subject, has been completed, and although the data will be analyzed and published for many years to come, the study has already produced information that alters how we think about, and react to, some of our earlier ideas about health. We 've sifted through the reports generated by the study thus far, as well as some other new and important studies, and interpreted the results for you in the following pages. Technology, medical science, mammograms and vaccinations can take you only so far along the road to health and longevity. Beyond that, your mother was right : eat your spinach, then go outside and play! 30s This is the time to establish the habits that will help prevent disease in the years ahead. FOR MOST of us, our @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with the demands on a woman tending to increase dramatically as marriage, children, work and an active social life converge, it 's particularly important that healthy habits-good nutrition, exercise, adequate sleep and time for relaxation-do n't get back-burnered now, " says Dr. Kimberly D. Gregory, who oversees health-care-quality issues in the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, in Los Angeles. Another key health goal for the decade, says Gregory : putting together a complete record of your family 's health history. By asking your parents, siblings and other relatives about illnesses, chronic disorders and causes and ages of death, you can give your doctor the full picture she needs to assess how best to stave off conditions for which you 're at risk. " I do n't recommend a baseline mammogram until age forty, but if there 's a family history, especially before menopause, it 's reasonable to get it sooner, " says Dr. Amy L. Mitchell, an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ you 're considering pregnancy, your family history may turn up genetic conditions that have a higher chance of being passed along to your children, such as Tay-Sachs disease, cystic fibrosis and Down syndrome. There 's also a genetic component to autoimmune disorders such as lupus. Graves ' disease and rheumatoid arthritis, in which the body 's immune system attacks itself. Since these disorders are among the few chronic conditions that tend to target younger women and are notoriously hard to suss out, knowing your family history can make all the difference in getting a prompt diagnosis and treatment. Says Dr. Josiah Wedgwood, chair of the Autoimmune Diseases Coordinating Committee at the National Institutes of Health, in Bethesda, Maryland, " When you have a disease that affects different organ systems, presents with a wide spectrum of symptoms and waxes and wanes over time, it 's easy to see a doctor for whatever the immediate complaint is but fail to see the bigger picture " of a chronic and possibly inheritable disease. HEART START With heart @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to protect your heart need to start early. " A healthy woman in her thirties should have a baseline cholesterol test that includes her levels of LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycerides, " recommends Dr. Nieca Goldberg, chief of women 's cardiac care at Lenox Hill Hospital, in New York City, and author of The Women 's Healthy Heart Program( Ballantine, 2006). " If your lipids are normal, you do n't need to repeat the test for five years, unless there 's a change in your health, including weight gain, " says Goldberg, noting that simply having a waist size of thirty-five inches or more increases heart-disease risk. An ideal cholesterol reading is an HDL greater than 50 mg/dL, triglycerides less than 150 mg/dL and an LDL less than 130 mg/dL( with an optimal level of 100 mg/dL or lower). Your doctor should monitor your blood pressure annually a nd do a blood-glucose test at least once a year, especially if you developed gestational diabetes during a pregnancy, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ protein tests( high levels can indicate heart problems). If any results are abnormal and/or you have other risk factors, expect to be tested more frequently, to change your lifestyle( reduce stress, increase exercise, quit smoking) and to take medication. TESTING, TESTING Screening in your thirties should include an annual gynecologic visit for a pelvic exam to cheek for any abnormalities in your uterus, cervix, vagina and ovaries ; a clinical breast exam to look for suspicious lumps : and a Pap smear to rule out cervical cancer. The liquid-based Pap test( cells are suspended in a liquid fixative instead of placed directly on a slide), approved by the FDA ten years ago, has become the standard, says Mitchell. " Studies show that the new Pap smears are much more accurate, and they have the added advantage of enabling a doctor to test for HPV human papillomavirus, " she adds. Since virtually all cases of cervical cancer are linked to one of about ten strains of HPV, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a cancer-causing strain of HPV, in which case she would need to have Pap tests more frequently.( There are dozens of other strains that do n't lead to cancer, including some that cause genital warts.) Two HPV vaccines-Gardasil, from Merck, and Cervarix, from GlaxoSmithKline-may be available soon. Gardasil is expecting FDA approval this summer, and GlaxoSmithKline plans to submit Cervarix to the FDA by the end of 2006. In a recent study published by the Lancet, researchers found that Cervarix induces antibodies that protect women for more than four years against the two strains of HPV responsible for 70 percent of cervical cancers. The study also found the vaccine( which is administered to girls before they become sexually active) effective against the third and fourth most common cancer-causing strains of the virus. Also to add to your annual calendar during this decade : twice-yearly dental cleanings( pregnancy hormones and infertility drugs dramatically increase your odds of developing gum discase) and a mole check by a dermatologist. In the past thirty @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, according to the Skin Cancer Foundation. MAYBE, BABY Recent years have brought several new contraceptive options. More women in Mitchell 's practice are turning to Mirena, the updated IUD( intrauterine device). " The newer IUD dispenses a little progestin, which helps decrease menstrual flow, " she says. This makes it a good choice for women with very heavy periods. Mitchell 's patients also like the Ortho Evra contraceptive patch, which delivers birthcontrol hormones through the skin, though, like all hormonereleasing contraceptives, it may increase the risk for blood clots. Other new options : Seasonale, a pill that causes a woman to get just four periods a year ; Yasmin, a pill that uses a combination of drospirenone( instead of progestin) and ethinyl estradiol ; YAZ, the new twenty-four-day-active pill that also uses drospirenone ; and the NuvaRing, a hormone-releasing ring placed in the vagina. Should motherhood be your goal, do n't pass up regular screenings for sexually transmitted diseases if you 're not in a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ sex in the past. " Chlamydia is an infection that can affect the Fallopian tubes, as can gonorrhea, " says Dr. Jane Frederick, a reproductive endocrinologist at Huntington Reproductive Centers, in Laguna Hills, California. " They can cause infertility down the road. " Screening for both can be done at the time of your Pap smear ; a blood test can also check for HIV and herpes. The most important consideration in having a child is how old you are. " Thirty-five is the critical age, " Frederick stresses. " Between thirty-five and forty, your monthly odds of conceiving drop to 10 to 15 percent. " The most likely cause of otherwise unexplained infertility? Eggs past their prime. 40s Change is the hallmark of the forties-and it 's both the upside and the downside. IF HEALTH in your forties is about anything, it 's about change, says Dr. Lynn Westphal, director of Women 's Health at Stanford University School of Medicine, in Stanford, California. Many of Westphal @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ forty, she says, " they start to realize that this is something they should have thought about earlier. " Dr. Jennie Ann Freiman, a physician in New York City and a member of the associate medical staff at Lenox Hill Hospital, also sees women in this age group starting to notice changes in-and the winding down of-their fertility. " In their mid-to-late forties, women typically begin to experience the symptoms of perimenopause, such as irregular periods, hot flashes, vaginal dryness, declining libido, weight gain( mostly in the belly area) and worsening of PMS-like symptoms and cramps. " Fortunately, oral contraceptives can smooth out the hormonal highs and lows that cause most perimenopausal symptoms. Other physical transformations to expect in your forties : changes in vision, a slowing metabolism, an increased risk for gum disease, gastrointestinal problems as the digestive system slows and a decrease in skin plumpness and elasticity. " As we age, everything gets less resilient, " says Dr. Sharon Lewin, an internist in private @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ changes are the negatives of the decade, the good news is plentiful as well. We 're likely to be more settled in our lives and more sure of ourselves. And there 's still time to make adjustments to head off heart disease, diabetes and hypertension. " Lifestyle changes can be enormously helpful in delaying the onset of disease or preventing it, " says Freiman. And nothing gives you more bang for your disease-fighting buck than exercise : five or more moderate thirty-minute workouts weekly have been shown to reduce the risk for all the major killers. The bone-protecting benefits of weight-bearing and strength-training exercise are particularly necessary for women in their forties, since bone loss accelerates greatly with menopause. It does n't take a lot to make a difference : a recent study of 164 overweight or obese women aged twenty-four to forty-four showed that lifting weights twice a week for an hour slowed middle-aged spread and especially fat gain to the belly, which is most strongly correlated with heart disease. Just as important are nutritional changes-namely, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ produce ; whole grains ; lean sources of protein and dairy ; and nuts, legumes and seeds. Maintaining a body mass index of 18.5 to 24.9 dramatically cuts your risk for the big killers as well as endometrial, breast and colon cancer and osteoarthritis, says the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention( CDC). Making changes like these now can spare you decades of frequent doctor visits, says Freiman : " You can take two drugs for hypertension, a couple of drugs for cholesterol, at least one drug for diabetes-or you can change your lifestyle and significantly reduce the number of drugs you 'll need to be on later. " TESTING, TESTING Now is the ideal time to establish some key baseline measurements that your physicians will use to properly prescribe for you a combination of screenings, lifestyle adjustments and treatments in the decades to come. So, in addition to your annual gynecologist visit to get a Pap smear( for cervical cancer), a pelvic exam and a clinical breast exam, add a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ forty.( Many gynecologists recommend that their patients do this even earlier, at thirty-five.) A recent study of more than 49,000 women found that digital mammography( versus film) was much better at detecting cancer in women under fifty, women with dense breasts and women in premenopausal or perimenopausal stages. " We found 28 percent more cancers in women who got the digital mammogram. so it 's a lot more sensitive, " says Dr. Etta Pisano, lead investigator of the trial and director of the biomedical-research imaging center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. But whatever kind of mammogram you have, do n't give up your monthly self-exam : a 2001 study by the CDC of 1,619 women aged twenty to forty-four found that 71 percent of cancers were discovered by the women themselves, though mammography was much more likely to catch early-stage cancers. This is also the decade when knowing your family history truly begins to pay off. For Lewin, these records are the best reference point in deciding which screening @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ relatives with adult-onset diabetes, then being even ten pounds overweight is much more of a concern than with someone who does n't have that background. " she says. A complete health history can send up red flags about " prediseases, " conditions in which symptoms have not yet emerged but are likelier to, often owing to an individual 's inherited risk. Since " prediabetes " and " prehypertension " are two of the biggest for fortysomethings, expect your doctor to ask for earlier and more frequent checks of your glucose levels and blood pressure, respectively, if your mom or dad has either condition. Even without a family history of diabetes, be sure to get a fasting blood-glucose test in your early forties. If gum disease is in your family tree, for example, you 'll want to see a periodontist in your forties, since 50 percent of gumdisease risk is genetic, says Susan Karabin, vice president of the American Academy of Periodontology. Getting gum disease under control may also cut your risk of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ because bacteria in the gums can migrate to the bloodstream. Thyroid disease is also more common starting in the forties ; 8 to 10 percent of women affected are between ages forty-five and fifty-four, notes Dr. Jeffrey R. Garber, chief of endocrinology at Harvard Vanguard Medical Associates, in Boston. He adds that most women with a thyroid problem have a mild version of hypothyroidism( underactive thyroid), characterized by fatigue, memory problems, depression, heavy periods and mood changes. But tests of thyroid-stimulating hormone and free T4 blood levels, he says, are very good at picking up early disease. 50s Gone forever is the idea that a woman 's usefulness ends when her period does. THESE ARE definitely not your mother 's fifties. Today women this age are running corporations and marathons, serving as U.S. secretary of state, working on cancer cures and managing museums, and they 're not stepping down anytime soon. Menopause, on the other hand, has n't changed a lot. The average age of onset @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ mother 's day. It is the defining event of this decade. The risk of such chronic conditions as heart disease, breast cancer, osteoporosis and dementia also begins to rise. Your inner life may become more troubled by sleeplessness or anxiety. The decisions you make now about how to adjust to this transition will have a profound effect on the second half of your life. Unfortunately, these decisions have become more complicated over the past five years as information has started to flow from the Women 's Health Initiative( WHI), which was launched in 1991. It was designed to determine the effects of hormones, dietary fat, calcium and vitamin D supplements on women 's health. The results have turned the conventional wisdom on its head and left many women-and health-care professionals-in a quandary. The study found no protection against stroke or benefit to a woman 's heart from hormone therapy, no protection against breast and colorectal cancers or heart disease from a low-fat diet, and no help for bones and colorectal health from @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in some cases, hormone therapy could slightly increase the risk of breast cancer, stroke, blood clots and cognitive decline. Women and their doctors found themselves scrambling to bring their health-care decisions in line with the WHI 's results. But since those first reports were released, a larger community of experts, including doctors, other researchers, public-health officials and even WHI scientists, has taken a closer look at the data and given women more definitive guidelines. You should, of course, speak with your doctor about how to approach menopausal symptoms, osteoporosis and breast and colon cancers. Meanwhile, here 's what we know now. MENOPAUSAL SYMPTOMS hot flashes, night sweats, sleeplessness, vaginal dryness, feelings of sadness and anxiety : you ca n't overestimate the importance or the impact of these symptoms. " Some women will be driven to change their lifestyles because of the unpredictability of their moods or their sleep problems, " says Dr. Christine Himes Fordyce, a geriatrician at the Group Health Cooperative, in Seattle. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for some years around her fiftieth birthday. It 's during this perimenopausal time, when the symptoms are intense, say many health-care professionals-and a new report from the WHI-that hormone therapy may he beneficial without causing harm to your heart. " If you are having hot flashes, bone problems or sexual difficulties, it 's reasonable to use hormone therapy, " says Dr. Noel Bairey Merz, a cardiologist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. " If you 're looking to protect your heart, it 's not. Use hormone therapy estrogen and progestin for women who still have their uteruses or estrogen alone for those who have had hysterectomies for the shortest period of time and at the lowest acceptable dose. " Women who have had hysterectomies can rest a little easier : a study published in the April 12, 2006, issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association concluded that estrogen alone does not increase the risk of breast cancer. OSTEOPOROSIS " A woman 's bones begin to thin when her estrogen levels drop at menopause, " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ medicine at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, in New York City. " Anyone with one of these risk factors-being thin or small framed, smoking, having an overactive thyroid or a mother who had a fracture-should get her first hone-density scan as soon as she is menopausal. " This is a controversial position because the United States Preventive Services Task Force( USPSTF) recommends that women with a risk factor be tested at sixty and that all women be tested at sixty-five. Why would earlier testing help? Because some women naturally have thin bones, a condition called lowpeak bone mass, and if their bone density is measured at menopause, that test score can be a baseline for future measurements. If your bones do n't get significantly thinner over time, you need n't worry about treatments to slow loss. " You just had thinner bones to begin with, " says Siris. Until recently, it was believed that the simplest way to guarantee strong bones was to get 1,200 to 1,500 milligrams of calcium @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ dairy) but from a supplement if necessary, and 800 to 1,000 international units of vitamin D3, most likely from a supplement( emphatically not D2, the form found in many multivitamins, because it takes about three times as much D2 to get any benefit). But in January 2006, the WHI called into question the benefits of calcium and vitamin D supplements. Still, as Siris explains, it may be because all of the women in the study-the supplement group and the control group-got adequate amounts of calcium in their diets to start with. Once a woman has consumed 1,200 to 1,500 milligrams, any more has little impact. When a bone-density test reveals osteoporosis, some good drugs, including Fosamax, Actonel and Boniva, can prevent bone loss, Siris says. But there are risks. Recent reports to the FDA described rare but serious cases of damage to the jawbone in patients taking bisphosphonates, a class of drugs that includes those used to treat bone loss. It 's not clear why only @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ by dental procedures. If you are taking a drug to treat osteoporosis or are thinking of it, alert your dentist and ask your doctorto explain the risks. Estrogen protects bones too. " If you decide to take hormones to treat the symptoms of menopause, you 'll get the added benefit of protecting your skeleton, " says Siris. But when you stop taking estrogen, you will begin to lose bone mass at a very rapid rate, so get a bone-density scan, and be prepared to begin the necessary medications to curtail bone loss if necessary. COLON CANCER The good news : this is the most curable of the major cancers if it 's caught in time. Almost 90 percent of colon-cancer deaths could be avoided if everyone over fifty got screened, says Dr. Jerome Waye, a clinical professor of medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, in New York City. The bad news : only 33 percent of women in this group do so, despite there being three very good choices for screening. A fecal @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the stool. It should be administered every year, beginning at age fifty. Your doctor will provide a home-test kit. You collect stool swipes from three consecutive bowel movements and place them on the supplied cards, which you return to your doctor or the laboratory. In the week before and during the period of time you 're collecting specimens, you 'll need to avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin and naproxen, red meat, vitamin C and citrus fruits. According to a study published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, when done annually, the FOBT reduces colon-cancer deaths by as much as 33 percent. The effectiveness of an annual FOBT can be improved if it is combined at five-year intervals with a flexible sigmoidoscopy, an examination of the rectum and the lower half of the colon. Unfortunately, recent studies suggest that because of anatomical differences, sigmoidoscopy misses significantly more polyps in women than in men. For that reason, and others, the third option, colonoscopy, is the test @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ examines the rectum and the full length of the colon. Get a baseline examination in your early fifties. If it 's normal, official recommendations are to have subsequent tests at ten-year intervals, but some doctors disagree with that advice. " The studies show that you can prevent death from colon cancer by screening every ten years, " says Waye. " But death is a bad end point for clinicians. Prevention is what we should focus on, and to prevent the incidence of cancer, we should screen every five years. "( If a sigmoidoscopy reveals polyps, small clumps of cells on the colon lining that can grow cancerous over time, you 'll most likely have to undergo a colonoscopy to remove them, which is why many doctors recommend colonoscopy. If polyps are detected, you must have follow-up colonoscopies every three to five years.) Both the colonoscopy and the sigmoidoscopy require a thorough bowel cleansing-strong laxatives for the former, enemas for the latter-which many patients find the most unpleasant part of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ kidney or heart disease. Colonoscopy requires anesthesia( usually IV sedation) and carries a 0.35 percent risk of serious complications such as bowel perforation or bleeding. Still, anyone who has a family history of colorectal cancers or polyps or a personal history of chronic inflammatory bowel disease should opt for colonoscopy. 60s You 've lived with your body for all these years ; you think you know every nook and cranny. But do you? KNOW THYSELF. That 's the mantra for women in their sixties. Now 's the time to pay attention when your body speaks to you. because the changes you feel are as important as regular screening tests. If you 're worried about incontinence during a game of tennis, if your sex life is less passionate than it used to be or if you 've had bouts of dizziness, do n't dismiss it all as a natural part of getting older. " Most of these events could reveal something important about your health, and we have good treatments for all of them, " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ San Francisco 's Veteran 's Administration Medical Center and at the University of California at San Francisco( UCSF). This is not to say that you should abandon the good-health routine you 've already established. The only part of your screening regimen you can think about forgoing is the Pap test. " We tell women they can stop doing cervical-cancer screenings at age sixty-five, " says Seattle 's Dr. Fordyce, " but only if they 've had a normal Pap for three consecutive years and if they 're not having new sex partners. " Everything else should be continued at the same frequency as in your fifties unless your doctor recommends more frequent testing. You should also add a pneumococcal vaccine at age sixty-five ; you wo n't need another. A DIFFERENT HEART Cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 killer of women. In the age groups beyond sixty, the rates at which men and women have heart disease converge, but the rate at which women die begins to outstrip the rate for men. Now, research into @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ suggest why. For many women, the underlying cause of damage to the heart muscle is different, and as a result, they exhibit different symptoms. These distinctions often lead to misdiagnoses and inappropriate treatments. In a man. one large clumpy blockage in a major artery is often the culprit. In a woman, the plaque that restricts the flow of blood may be distributed throughout an artery, eventually narrowing it dangerously. The angiogram typically used to find a clot fails, and the heart problem goes undiagnosed. Or a woman 's arteries may go into spasms, which often occur in smaller blood vessels rather than in major arteries, where doctors look for blockages. Either way, some important tools used to diagnose heart problems-such as the standard stress test and angiograms-are less effective in women, as arc treatments designed to bypass( surgery) or flatten( angioplasty) the large clots more common in men. Not all heart disease in women follows this pattern, of course, and many women exhibit the same @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the best strategy is to be diligent in screening for risk factors( high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes) and to be aware of the symptoms that distinguish women from men : shortness of breath : pain in the back, shoulders or arms ; and dizziness and nausea, which can signal reduced blood flow. Should you experience symptoms you think may be a heart attack, be firm with your doctor if you believe he is examining you as he would a male patient. While angioplasty may not be your salvation, you could benefit from taking aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins or ACE( angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors to control blood pressure. GOT TA GO, GOT TA GO It 's hard to miss incontinence when it arrives on the scene. You worry about leakage when you sneeze or exercise strenuously. That 's stress incontinence, and it 's common at two points in a woman 's life-after childbirth and after menopause. Or you may feel the urge to urinate so suddenly and so powerfully that you 're afraid @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. This condition is known as an overactive bladder, or urge incontinence, and its prevalence increases in the midforties and with every subsequent decade. " Fortunately, we have easy ways to relieve incontinence, " says Dr. Cindy L. Amundsen, an associate professor in the division of urogynecology at Duke University Medical Center, in Durham. North Carolina. A 5 percent reduction in weight decreases incontinence episodes by 50 percent. Cutting your fluid intake to roughly a liter or two a day of noncaffeinated, nonalcoholic beverages also helps. And, yes, those Kegel exercises, repetitive tightening of the vaginal muscles throughout the day, do work. Several medications are available too. " They reduce urge episodes by 60 to 70 percent, " Amundsen says. But they 're not a complete answer. And they can have adverse interactions with other drugs, such as most medications for glaucoma. " A good solution is to use the medication to get things under control, " says Amundsen, " and then work on a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ or cut back on the drugs. " For women troubled only during vigorous exercise, simple fixes may suffice. A pessary( a diaphragm-like device inserted in the vagina) helps support the urethra. Collagen injected into the lining of the urethra, repeated at six- to eighteen-month intervals, can also reinforce the muscles that keep the canal tightly closed. For more severe cases, a midurethral sling can be surgically implanted. " The procedure takes about thirty minutes and is minimally invasive ; in most patients it reduces stress-incontinent episodes by 80 to 90 percent, " Amundsen says. " But you may have to have it replaced as your body changes over time. " The WHI has called into question some long-standing ideas about the impact of estrogen on incontinence. According to a report on the WHI data published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, estrogen taken orally produces a higher rate of incontinence, but Amundsen and the journal 's editors think that the jury is still out on the effectiveness of topical transvaginal estrogen @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ treatment given as a cream, a suppository or a small estrogen-containing ring that remains in the vagina for three months is definitely beneficial for treating urogynecological problems, " says Amundsen. MIDLIFE BLUES The USPSTF recommends that physicians test their older patients for depression. " It 's an increasingly important illness in the sixty-plus age group, " says Dr. Russell Harris, a professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina( UNC) School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, " but it frequently goes unnoticed. Depression has a huge impact on people 's lives, and it should n't, because we have such good treatments. " 70s It 's payoff time. All the good habits you 've followed for years will now reward you. THE FASTEST-GROWING age group of Americans is centenarians, people over 100 years old, and women make up 85 percent of them. Today 's seventy-five-year-old woman can reasonably expect to live another fifteen or twenty years, and that fact changes the way we think about staying healthy. Exercise and diet @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ demonstrate their benefits in forestalling such chronic conditions as hypertension, heart disease, cancer, osteoporosis, arthritis and even incontinence. If you have been and remain active and your weight is under control, you can begin to cut hack on or eliminate some screening tests. Regular blood-pressure checks are still crucial, but a woman at age eighty whose colon-cancer screenings have been completely clean for thirty years can probably stop getting tested it ' her doctor agrees, says Mount Sinai 's Dr. Waye. Decisions about health require a new level of individuality based on your health history, a benefit-risk assessment and personal preference rather than universal checklists. Whether you get a mammogram every year and how you choose to handle bone scans for osteoporosis depend on what else is going on in your life. A seventy-five-year-old woman who has serious heart disease might not want to undergo a mammogram or colorectal screening. The cancer in a woman of that age is more likely to be slow growing than in a younger woman, and her heart condition significantly @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ other hand, a perfectly healthy seventy-five-yearold who 's still very active and whose health is n't threatened by another chronic illness should continue her regular mammograms. She could live another twenty years-or more-and she 's probably healthy enough to handle treatment if it 's needed. For her, the risk of surgery is worth it. " In the face of uncertainty about the appropriateness of a screening test, a woman 's health and her preferences have to play a role in deciding how to proceed, " says UCSF 's Dr. Walter. This level of individual attention is most effective when you have a regular primary-care doctor, someone you trust and with whom you have a comfortable relationship. " If I 've seen a patient regularly, and she comes in with a subtle change in her behavior. I 'm more likely to pick it up, " UNC 's Dr. Harris says. ' " Can you see okay? ' I 'll ask. ' Can you hear okay? How 's your mood? ' Those are things @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ even notice. But I would. They all contribute to a decline in quality of life and could lead to a fall and a fractured bone. " Speaking of bones, advancing arthritis need n't limit your activity, even if anti-inflammatory medication is n't helping enough. Today, when the pain reaches an intolerable level, you can opt for hip-, shoulder- or knee-replacement surgery if your doctor recommends it. The technology has improved considerably in recent years, and some patients( who were diligent about physical therapy) report being back at their golf game only eight weeks after a hip replacement. Recovery from knee-replacement surgery takes about four weeks longer, depending on the patient, her age and her level of physical fitness. You and your doctor should regularly review your medications, including homeopathic remedies and vitamins. Make sure your prescription medications and vitamins are compatible, that they do n't cancel each other out and that the doses are still correct. " See if you can eliminate some, " Fordyce says. " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of producing side effects, and the fewer medications you take, the better. " The emphasis at seventy and beyond is less about screening for illness and more about staying active-physically, socially and mentally. You should be especially sensitive to any feelings of disorientation, dizziness, difficulty speaking, blurred vision or weakness of the limbs, all of which could be warning signs of a ministroke. Again, do n't think of these signs as a normal part of aging. Go straight to the emergency room, or see your doctor immediately. MENTAL FITNESS " To date, there is no routine screening for Alzheimer 's disease, " says Dr. Eric B. Larson, director of the Group Health Cooperative 's Center for Health Studies, in Seattle. It is the disease people fear most as they move through their fifties, sixties and seventies, and there is no known cure and no reliable way to prevent it. " For now, the best approach we have is to delay its onset, " says Larson. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ but it doubles every five years after seventy so that about half of all ninety-year-olds will suffer some kind of dementia. If we can postpone the onset for even ten years, it 's long enough to spare a lot of patients. " Over the past decade, researchers have explored the preventive potential of estrogen, anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen. vitamin E supplements and ginkgo biloba, but their effectiveness has yet to be demonstrated. There 's a strong possibility that folic acid is beneficial. But the best chances of postponing dementia are all lifestyle-based. Keep your blood pressure, weight and diabetes under control. Stay socially and intellectually active. Most important of all, exercise. Several recent studies found that physical activity can delay onset and even improve the functioning of some Alzheimer 's patients. In January, the Adult Changes in Thought Study, from the Group Health Cooperative, found that walking for twenty minutes three times a week reduced the risk of developing dementia by up to 40 percent, even for those who did @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ are very common in postmenopausal women, and most have nothing to do with an increased risk of Alzheimer 's. A recent study reported that changes in the brain as early as middle age can reduce your ability to multitask. Finding it harder to read the newspaper and listen to the radio at the same time is a normal part of aging, Fordyce says. If you 're worried, ask your doctor about it. She will recommend a speech therapist or an occupational therapist who can administer a test.( Do n't try to find a test on your own. Anything marketed on the Internet is of questionable value.) " It can take as little as half an hour, " Fordyce says. Time well spent to ease your mind. Sidebar Her Thirties : Without Trepidation INES SASTRE, Model, Actress " When you are twenty, you have a certain fear of the unknown, " says the Spanish beauty INES SASTRE, who has appeared on the cover of Town &; Country as a sixteen-year-old ingenue @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ This time around, she 's happy to report that whatever apprehension she once had about her future has subsided, clearing the way for several life-changing events. Chief among the exciting developments is her marriage this past April to longtime friend Alessandro Corrias, who works in the Italian media industry ; they are expecting their first child this fall. This year also marks her first big role in an American film, The Lost City. " The most beautiful things happen to you when you least expect them, " says the London-based newlywed, who walks and swims to stay in shape and who recently celebrated her tenth anniversary as the face of Lancme. So what might she be up to the next time she appears on our cover? Sastre defers to Eleanor Roosevelt : " Yesterday is history. Tomorrow is mystery. Today is a gift. " Her Forties : All Fun, No Fuss JULIE SKARRATT, Photographer " I do n't have fifty minutes a day to put on makeup and do my hair, " says @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ out of the house in five minutes, twenty-three seconds. " This is a surprising statement coming from a former Ford model, even one who nine years ago traded her career in front of the camera lens for a career behind it. Yet with or without makeup, the forty-five-year-old stunner, who moved to the United States from Sydney, Australia, in 1983, is perennially radiant. Perhaps that 's because she 's so thrilled with where she is at this point in her life. " I 'm in my prime, " Skarratt says. Her thriving career as a photographer takes her around the globe, from shooting a high-profile wedding for Town &; Country in St. Bart 's to covering parties in the south of France. And when she travels for pleasure, she indulges her athletic side, surfing in Costa Rica and skiing in Austria. These days, her constant activity enables her to keep off unwanted weight without being overzealous about her diet. " When I was a model, I used to starve @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in moderation. " Sidebar Her Fifties : Scaling New Heights STEPHANIE FRENCH, Businesswoman, Philanthropist " I love trying different things, " says STEPHANIE FRENCH, a senior vice president at U.S. Trust in New York. In 1997 one of those " things " was climbing Mount Kilimanjaro. This mother of a twenty-two-year-old daughter and a twelve-year-old son enjoyed the experience so much that she bested the achievement shortly thereafter with a trek up Mount Everest. The resourcefulness that helped her climb 18,500 feet above sea level( just above base camp) was formed during her childhood, in Darien, Connecticut. French 's mother, who at ninety is still a " Marilyn Monroe blonde, " emphasized the importance of cultivating one 's beauty and feminine charms. Her father, a consultant to the chairman of the board at American Express, taught her that she was responsible for developing her God-given talents and using them in a way that would help others. After earning an M.B.A. from Harvard Business School- " because I never wanted to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, " explains French-she put both parents ' wisdom to use, assuming prominent jobs in the worlds of corporate and private philanthropy. French, who resides in Manhattan, maintains that being in her midfifties has taught her that the older she gets, the better life gets. " For one thing, I now have a much greater sense of who I am. " Her Sixties : Still in High Gear ADRIANA MNUCHIN, Entrepreneur " If you had to say one thing about me, it would probably be that I always walk fast, " says ADRIANA MNUCHIN, who operates the Mayflower Inn &; Spa, in Washington, Connecticut, with her husband, Robert, an art dealer and a former partner at Goldman Sachs, along with their daughter Lisa Medley. In fact, lethargy has never been an option for the Memphis-born Mnuchin, who despite having had five children has maintained the same weight since she was in her twenties.( " Though the weight has shifted, " she admits.) Now well @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ boxes, plays tennis, does Pilates and takes power walks. " I like the energy it gives me, particularly as I get older, " she says of her rigorous regime. She is more convinced than ever that her contemporaries " need to continue to engage themselves in active pursuits. It gives us a sense of vitality. " Mnuchin sees the 20,000-square-foot destination spa at the Mayflower, where the focus is on fitness, as a place for other women to get on the right path. " If you set goals, " says this disciplined go-getter, " you tend to meet them. " Sidebar Her Seventies : It 's How You Feel DIAHANN CARROLL, Actress, Singer " I 'll be seventy-one this month, " says DIAHANN CARROLL, as if she ca n't quite believe it. Indeed, if it were n't for the length of her tenure in the public eye, during which she has entertained film and television audiences for more than fifty years-most famously as the scheming Dominique Deveraux on Dynasty-we @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ her most recent, to singer Vic Damone, ended in divorce in 1996), one child( journalist and screenwriter Suzanne Kay) and now two grandchildren, Carroll could by all rights settle into a comfy rocking chair at her home in Beverly Hills. Instead, she 's doing a cabaret tour( " The Life and Times of Diahann Carroll "), which enjoyed a successful two-week run at Feinstein 's New York, at the Regency Hotel. " Retirement is a dangerous, incorrect concept, " she says, " because you are still a-li-ve. " In addition to working out with a personal trainer, Carroll-a breast-cancer survivor-watches her diet, eats lots of fruits and vegetables and makes sure to see her doctors regularly. " Dwelling on aging is the sickest thing we can do, " she says with conviction. " Besides, seventy is not what it used to be. " In Carroll 's case, at least, seventy may just be the new forty. For fashion information, see page @ @ @ 
