4050341 November 23-December 22 Your strong drive allows you to work miracles. Just be careful not to let it tip into overassertiveness. Though you struggle with job stress, remember that your standards may be too high and you should relax over the holidays. While ongoing uncertainties at home have created an inability to rest, by the 31st the cavalry arrives to save the day. While not a literal centaur, Verdura 's chic half horse, half fish will do a Sagittarius just fine. Verdura brooch, by special order. 212-758-3388. Capricorn December 23-January 20 The month begins and ends with enthusiasm for the future, but nostalgia kicks in and revisiting old haunts, friends, and family may prove bittersweet. Dutiful travel may also be part of the picture. Though you long for past freedoms and you are reluctant to lose security, it 's a time that demands serious thought. Aquarius January 21-February 19 Your charismatic company is irresistible, but be sure generosity does n't carry you away. Friends and lovers make a bumpy holiday and may be a bad influence, tempting @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ may divert your spirit, but your current psychological strength and positivity help you gain respect. Pisces February 20-March 20 You are rebellious, but do n't let your instincts undermine safety, success, or personal connections, even if you are craving more excitement. Powerful people bring benefits, provided you do n't push your luck. As a mover and shaker on a project, you are impressive. With care and humility, you could start the year with social triumph. Aries March 21-April 20 A cozy stay-at-home vacation may not cutit, as wider horizons call, but ensure that exciting adventures around the 12th do n't get too risky. Professional events suggest you will have your cell phone close at hand. Do n't let a desire for power blind you to others ' needs. If a quarrel ensues, maintain your dignity. Taurus April 21-May 21 The month opens with a celebratory feel ; you 'll want to splurge. Beware of exhausting others ' money, and make sure someone else takes care of your funds @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ holidays making ambitious plans. Whatever you do, this is a landmark time. Gemini May 22-June 21 Personal affairs are uncertain because domestic or career changes are undermining the status quo or are simply due to your inner doubts. Moments of truth help you courageously end worn-out ways of communicating and establish a renewed basis for associations that are worth the effort, so keep the faith. Cancer June 22-July 23 Crazy events at work keep you guessing, but resolve not to let it spoil the festivities. Be aware of the presence of formidable and complex individuals who need wise handling. Some are healing and help you gain strength, but others may be plain oppressive. It becomes clear on the 28th, and the new year can usher in liberation. Leo July 24-August 23 A seasonably sociable period can be costly. Around the 13th, when financial uncertainty is strong, think twice before lavishly spending on gifts or involving yourself in unwise romantic dealings. A showdown occurs about your future, so seize the challenge of making @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Virgo August 24-September 23 Focus on maintaining peace during this festive period -- not easy, as a stormy mood is stirring up at home. Others have been volatile for some time, and your good nature may finally be stretched to its limits. If you 're single or just determined to find a better love affair, the party season can bring some new and prophetic relationships into your life. Libra September 24-October 23 Try to accomplish a great deal in the first week. Midmonth, when you have real panache but confidence lags, fight your fears and view the cup as half full. Colleagues will frustrate you, but choose not to inflame the situation. Despite the merry season, you will need to face truths at home. Keep your resolution to not abandon your ideals. Scorpio October 24-November 22 Remember that money does n't buy love. However, you are certainly not making bad judgments with your insight into others. Your observations and words are powerful, but they may be too honest for some. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ yet you should celebrate optimistically about getting on the map in 2009. 
