2018441 AND OTHER INANITIES OF CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING. BY MICHAEL FINKEL // Maybe it 's the cross-country skis that get my goat. Are the things filled with helium, or what? If you so much as look at a crosscountry ski the wrong wav, it 's liable to snap in two. Call me crazy, but I like my ski gear to have some heft. It makes me feel rugged, virile. The latest trend in X-C skis, though, is to make them even shorter and lighter. Pretty soon, I 'm convinced, we 'll be able to store a couple of pairs in the glove box. Perhaps use " em to floss with. And the boots. I do n't know about you, but I 've never been tempted to get out there on a cold January day and stick my feet into shoes that appear to have all the warmth of a wet paper bag. Do n't tell me about DuPont this or Gore-Tex that. I 've been to the shops. Top-of-the-line cross-country boots look suspiciously like Chuck Taylors. Then there @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ I 'll concede that there 's something undeniably audacious about skiing around with a set of jousting lances. That is, until you stumble forward and smash your teeth on the grip of one. Recently, I expressed these reservations to some acquaintances who are diehard cross-country skiers.( All of them, by the way, are bone thin, with sunken eyes, elbows that could pick locks, and doleful demeanors-a look that, at least to me, brings to mind Mahatma Gandhi, midfast.) They listened to my complaints, then heaped scorn upon me. " Pain is good! " they shouted. " Slow is soulful, " they bellowed. " Flat is phat! " they clamored. So last winter, when the conditions went to ice at my usual downhill spot, I donned a skintight outfit worthy of a Vegas revue, drove to a local cross-country area, rented gear, and gave the sport a try. I completed a 10-kilometer loop, in-line style, which means there was @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to stick my skis into and pole away. By the time I was halfway around, I think I qualified as an intermediate. It was excellent exercise, I confess, and there was a sort of Zen element about it. In fact, I came up with several crosscountry koans : What is the sound of one nostril running? If a hamstring snaps in the forest, will anybody hear it? How is it that people are able to ingest banana-flavored PowerBars on a frigid day? And I learned why crosscountry skiers are in such good shape. Wearing a skimpy outfit and sweating like a fry cook means that if you stop-even just long enough to take a pee-you 'll find yourself in the latter stages of deep freeze. But in terms of adrenal stimulation, I 'd have to place cross-country skiing somewhere between flipping an omelet and tying my shoelaces. The scariest part of the day was wearing my stretchy getup into a bar.( I 've noticed that there 's no such thing as a cross-country @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ I again met with my cross-country pals. I told them of my unenlightening experience. A great sadness descended upon them, for I was not a convert. " You must try the backcountry! " one insisted. " You must smell the forest! " wailed another. " You must slide upon untrammeled earth! " insisted a third. I was instructed to visit the Holy Grail of cross-country adventure : Yellowstone National Park. And so I went. I convinced my girlfriend, also a cross-country conscientious objector, to join me, and we planned a three-day trip into the vast interior of the park. Right off, I learned that cross-country skiing while wearing a heavy backpack feels about as natural as playing the piano while wearing mittens. All the gentle nuances of movement essential for balance upon my skittery, edgeless X-C skis were lost, replaced by flailing, herky-jerky motions, my various limbs performing break-dance-style moves. As for the supposedly splendiferous joy of creating one 's own tracks through virgin forest, allow @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ trail was exhausting at best. Far worse, in places where the snowpack was weak, we broke through the surface and sank in to our hips. Then we struggled as though caught in quicksand, forced to jettison both pack and poles so we could fight our way back to terra a bit more firma. The uphills were brutal-those fish-scale thingies on the bottom of our skis( " waxless, " the rental man boasted) had all the stickiness of a Post-it note. The downhills, on the other hand, were terrifying. You might think that a small downward incline would produce a scrap of speediness that might actually inject the sport with a modicum of unchecked merriment. Not so. The appropriate way to deal with undue acceleration while on cross-country skis, I 've learned, is to promptly flop upon your derriere. At one time, had thought this butt-bounce technique was strictly for lesser-skilled cross-countryers. That was before I attended the Olympic Games in Lillehammer, Norway. There I learned how Olympic-caliber cross-country @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ upon their derrieres or, perhaps a little more gracefully, upon their noses. Even the mighty Scandinavians did this. Their method for descending a hill on helium skis was to barrel straight down-no brakes. no steering, arms waving as if attempting flight-and then perform some sort of Pete Rose slide into the padded barrier at the bottom of the course, leap back up, and continue along the track. This, it turns out, is faster than snowplowing safely down a slope. We had planned to descend just like the Olympians-fast and straight. concluding with a butt flop. But instead of padded barriers, we were faced with a forest of lodgepole pines. Any adrenaline rush we may have experienced was swiftly replaced by a longing for motocross pads. Somehow, we both managed to get through the journey with our craniums uncracked, though I observed most of Yellow, stone 's natural wonders with half my head buried in snow. During the three days, neither of us smiled once. It ca n't @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ fair trial. And I concluded that cross-country skiing lacks a vital dimension. This missing dimension is the one that separates work from play. If Sisyphus ' hill in Hades were covered with snow, he 'd be wearing cross-country skis. That 's my theory, and here 's how I back it up : Proof one : While participating in their sport, cross-country skiers do not smile. Even the models on the covers of crosscountry skiing magazines look as if they 're having about as much fun as sewer workers toiling on a hot day. Proof two : The sport has been shunned by the youthful fun-seeking masses. How many times have you seen cross-country skiing featured in an MTV video? A Mountain Dew commercial? A Nike ad? Have you ever spotted a Co-Ed Naked Cross-Country Skiing T-shirt? Proof three : Closeout sales at sporting goods stores always feature about 50 dozen sets of cross-country gear. I 've seen skis marked down to something like 89 cents. Salesmen have offered me money to take the stuff @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. My heart goes out to all the hardcore crosscountry skiers across the nation. All 17 of them. These hardy souls, in their limegreen spandex leggings and cute, little sneakeresque booties, are the last of a suffering breed. While most of us wintertime sliders flock to the bump runs, or the halfpipe, or the steep and speedy groomers, cross-country skiers are busy poling their way around an endless catwalk. While the rest of us enjoy the warmth of warp-speed gondolas, or the heartiness of base-lodge victuals, crosscountryers are out there working their little tushes off and sucking down Gu. In this age of sneeze-length attention spans. of hyper-instant gratification and X-Games inanity, the folks on the helium skis with the lung power of Kenyan marathoners and the energy of amphetamine freaks are the pariahs of our time. They are guilty of the most unseemly of social taboos and are rarely invited to barbecues. Their crime? They knowingly and willingly participate in A Sport That Is Clearly Not Fun. <p> 
