2032741 It 's what 's inside that counts. // With apologies to RT. Barnum, his is not the greatest show on Earth. It 's 200-mph NASCAR stockers swapping sponsor decals on the Daytona high banks and Craftsman Truck Series pickups bump drafting like road-raged, late-for-work plumbers. Ten months of the year you can rock back in your Barcalounger with your beer and BLT, and cheer for Chevy, Dodge, Ford, and now Toyota, until you 're hoarse. You can even turn over to the Speed Channel and find out what your favorite driver eats for breakfast. Unfortunately, you do n't learn as much about the cars. How exactly is a family sedan transformed into a NASCAR speed machine? What 's the difference between a NASCAR Cup Car and a Craftsman pickup? To find out, POPULAR MECHANICS arranged access to Roush Racing 's Concord, N.C., shops-the home of five front-line teams including Matt Kenseth 's 2003 Winston Cup-winning No. 17 Ford Taurus. Roush 's on-site manager, Steve Lloyd, gave us the run of his 3-year-old, 99,000-sq. -ft. speed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ are as brightly lit as a hospital operating room and nearly as antiseptic. The crack fabricators and speed merchants employed here demonstrate NASA-grade fastidiousness. And while each NASCAR team has its variations, all adhere to the same theme. So what we learned at Roush can be considered fairly representative of any top team. What 's In A Name Since the term " stock car " became obsolete shortly after buggy whips fell from use, the proper name for one of these racers is " Cup Car. " That means conformance with NASCAR 's rule book rather than blueprints or engineering specs originating from Motor City. Construction of a new racer begins in the chassis shop, where short chunks of steel tubing are welded together in fixtures to create front and rear subi rames. Seven different jigs are needed to support four distinct car varieties for use on superspeedways, normal 1.5-mile tracks, short tracks and road courses. The differences lie in subtle variations in suspension mounting points and cooling systems. Short-track cars need extra airflow to the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ higher g-forces associated with steeply banked corners. One front and one rear subframe are joined by a hundred or more welds to the roll cage. This is a collection of longer steel tubes that serves three purposes : It provides an unyielding structural foundation for the suspension and powertrain systems, it guards the driver from injury, and it supports the exterior sheetmetal. NASCAR specifies what size tube goes where and its tech inspectors check for conformity at every race event. That does n't stop teams from building their roll cages with the lowest possible center of gravity in the interest of performance. Large box-section tubes are used at the bottom of the cage to serve as a storage compartment for ballast. NASCAR rules specify a Cup Car race weight of 3400 pounds and how much of that weight can be biased toward the car 's left side. Various panels formed and trimmed by sheet-metal specialists are welded in place as the roll cage takes shape on a perfectly flat surface plate. One nod to tradition is the mandatory use of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and Dodges alike. Working In Volume Ten Roush fabricators crank out 40 or more chassis assemblies every year, investing approximately 170 hours in each one before it 's delivered to the body shop. A surface plate is used to provide a dead-accurate reference plane for critical dimensions. An overhead laser light precisely locates the car 's centerline. The first piece welded to a Taurus Cup Car 's cage is a genuine Ford Taurus roof panel. NASCAR rules also require factory-stamped hood and decklid panels, so remnants of the stock car past do continue. Fenders, door skins and roof pillars are hand formed, trimmed to fit the factory-supplied metal and welded in place. Carbon-fiber-composite nose and tailpieces are molded in Roush Industry facilities located in Michigan and supplied to all Nextel teams running Tauruses. For safety 's sake, glass windows have n't been used for more than a decade. Lexan molded to standard Taurus contours is both tougher and lighter. On the driver 's side of the windshield, five tear-off layers of plastic sheet are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ahead when the debris flies during a long race. Some leeway is allowed in certain areas of the car, such as the front corners, but the overall shape must conform to the 30 or so NASCAR templates. Recent rule changes have diminished brand-to-brand differences, but key templates are still unique to a particular model. The critical rear spoiler angle is now consistent across the board, though each brand is assigned its own height and width dimensions. For 2004, tighter tolerances are specified between the checking templates and adjoining body surfaces. Once assembled, the fully skinned chassis is painted. Interiors are light gray except for a large pipe containing the fuel line, which is painted bright red for ready identification by rescue crews. After painting, the car moves to an assembly area where it becomes a ready-to-rumble racer. Nearby subassembly shops feed in the required parts. The steering arms, which are machined from solid steel billets, are both welded and bolted to the massive cast-steel front spindles that attach the front wheels @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ slotted attachment holes to permit fine-tuning of both the geometry and the suspension settings at the track. To save weight, less heavily loaded upper control arms are made of chrome-molybdenum steel. Italian-made Brembo brake calipers are machined from solid chunks of aluminum. During short-track races, the silicone brake fluid is circulated to help cool these hard-working components. The central portion of the rear axle is a 9-in. ring-and-pinion differential, a basic design originally used in 1971 Ford pickup trucks. Full-floating hubs carry each wheel in a massive pair of tapered roller bearings, so axle shafts are n't subjected to bending forces. The long I-beamshaped trailing arms that attach the rear axle to the car are patterned from a mid-1960s Chevrolet pickup truck design. A track bar( also known as a Panhard rod) provides lateral location and a means of adjusting the car 's handling characteristics. NASCAR requires white paint for the 4-in. -dia. driveshafts to heighten their visibility in the event they land on the track. Power-steering gearbox ratios vary from a quick 10:1 on @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ The Jericho 4-speed transmissions are a racing evolution of Ford 's old toploader box. Virtually every part has a serial number so its service life can be logged. A special Teflon coating applied to most parts is durable and easy to clean. Chassis adjustments available to crew chiefs include wedge bolts that determine the static load each corner of the car carries, coil spring rates, track bar position and antiroll bar diameters. The current strategy is to use relatively soft springs to permit the 1500 pounds or so of aerodynamic downforce generated by the body to snuggle the car within a smidgen of the track surface-the goal here is minimum drag. Antiroll bars as thick as your forearm maintain a flat attitude in the turns. As assembly progresses, the cockpit gradually becomes a well-organized control center full of fire extinguisher bottles, an aluminum seat that supports the driver from head to toe, a Hurst shifter, and the minimum number of switches and instruments needed to keep tabs on critical systems. For 2004, NASCAR mandated repositioning MSD @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ area to facilitate checks aimed at discouraging the use of illegal traction control systems. Similar But Not Equal Roush 's Lloyd also arranged a tour of facilities in Mooresville, N.C., where engines are assembled and Craftsman Truck Series pickups are built for two Roush teams. Here we discovered there 's little difference between a Craftsman pickup and a Nextel Cup Car beyond the obvious visual distinctions. Most of the roll cage is common to both, though the truck does roll on a 112-in. wheelbase versus the car 's 110in. span between axles. Engines must be between 350 and 358 cu. in. with no more than a 12:1 compression ratio in both series. Trucks must run a Holley carburetor with less than half the airflow capacity of what 's permitted in cars, but the pickups are n't subject to the restrictor plates that inhibit the Cup Cars on the superspeedways. Roller lifters are allowed in trucks, but flat tappets are mandatory in cars. The bottom line is 750 or so horsepower at about 8000 rpm, dropping to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. One notable change for 2004 is that Ford teams can run newly developed cylinder heads with raised intake ports, which in turn reguire new low-deck cylinder blocks. Every cylinder head is checked for proper flow on a bench, and every engine is run in on a dynamometer. Sidebar MOTORSPORTS Sidebar The Quest For More Speed Body And Frame Teams have some freedom in building cars to create as low a center of gravity as possible for improved aerodynamics and roadholding. But certain specifics are determined by NASCAR rules, including the mandatory 110-in. distance between the centers of the front and rear axles. Suspension Crew chiefs can constantly alter the suspension settings by adjusting the individual spring rates and strut stiffness. As conditions change during a race, the crew can alter suspension firmness at any wheel by adding or removing spring wedges. Shocks are adjustable too. NASCAR tech inspectors check body dimensions and angles with specific templates to prevent cheating. All cars have the rear spoilers of the same fixed angle, but each brand has its own @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the rain.Therefore, race tires are slicks, unlike street tires. Crew chiefs use tire pressure settings to make fine adjustments to their car 's handling as race conditions change. Critical to race strategy is balancing the use of fresh tires with the time required in the pits to install them. Sidebar Drivers have known for years that traveling in a group is faster than traveling alone, so teams work with each other to form drafting alliances. The lead car plows through the air, creating a partial vacuum behind it. The following cars fill the vacuum, which helps reduce drag for both the leading and following cars. Many races are won by the pit crews. The seeming chaos is truly a carefully practiced ballet. Rules dictate how many crew members go " over the wall " to work on the car. Crew members " behind the wall " hand and throw tires, tools and fuel cans to teammates. Strategies decided upon by the driver and crew chief just before the pitstop include how many tires @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to take on.Teams try to take pitstops during caution periods when passing is not allowed rather than during " green light " racing. Engine tuning secrets abound but are highly guarded by all teams. NASCAR tech inspectors regularly dismantle engines after each race, to check for rules infractions. The dreaded " restrictor plate, " which reduces the volume of air/fuel mixture entering the engine, lowers speeds at select, very high-speed superspeedways likeTalladega. // <p> 
