2103241 How unlike Teutonic Knights or samurai, mutter their critics, are these modern specimens of great powers. When the call to battle Saddam Hussein bugled forth, Germany and Japan begged off as conscientious objectors. Though they have flourished and grown rich behind U.S. defense cordons, both countries quailed at the call to arms. War with Iraq? The wolf that ate Kuwait was not at their door. Deterring aggression? Bonn 's attitude amounted to " Let George do it. " Standing fast by a security partner? Washington found it apt that Tokyo is ringing in the Year of the Sheep. So stand the accused. Overlooked somehow in their summary court-martial, however, has been 50 years of history. Five decades ago, Germany and Japan were roundly reviled as the scourges of civilization, martial societies gone almost irredeemably mad. Amid the ashes of 1945, the two Axis allies were warned against ever taking a gun beyond their borders again. Children were taught that their fathers and grandfathers committed the worst crimes known to man. The governments were forced to rely @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Gradually, as the lessons sank in, both countries were allowed to rebuild their armed forces, but under some of the strictest self-defense limits in the world. Should the two nations be tempted to lapse, moreover, any number of watchdogs stand ready to pounce. Japan 's Asian neighbors tend to bark at the least whiff of what they suspect might be " resurgent militarism. " Last March, Major General Henry Stackpole, the commander of U.S. Marines based in Japan, defended America 's troop presence there : " No one wants a rearmed, resurgent Japan. So we are a cap in the bottle, so to speak. " When the two Germanys prepared to unite last year, one allied anxiety concerned what kind of extraterritorial stormtrooper the reborn Fatherland might prove to be. In July, Nicholas Ridley, then Britain 's Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, publicly stated what many privately thought when he said that proposals for a European Community common currency were " a German racket designed to take over @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ he added, was " useful to remember. " Now Germany and Japan are being assailed for their pacifism. Americans and Britons complain that Germany and Japan have failed to measure up as allies and as responsible members of the world community : despite their own vested interests in the gulf, they are not doing their fair share. Stung by the criticism, Bonn and Tokyo in late January ponied up sizable additional aid : $5.5 billion and $9 billion, respectively. Germany also pledged to send antiaircraft missile units to Turkey and defensive military equipment to Israel. Japan assigned five military C-130 transport aircraft to repatriate Asian workers fleeing the war zone. Yet so powerful is their nations ' abhorrence of war that Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu risked political rebellion. 
