2011741 totalhealth science editor Parris Kidd, Ph.D. in his April 1999 article " Selenium Effective Cancer Prevention-A lowly Mineral Revolutionizes the Disease Paradigm, " reported the following from a paper published in what he termed as the " notoriously conservative " Journal of the American Medical Association( JAMA). IA high selenium yeast tablet at 200 micrograms per day produced a 50 percent reduction in cancer mortality. Selenium was also found to reduce the incidence of all cancers by better than one third. " He went on to comment, " These results are astonishing... the potential this represents for cutting the emotional, spiritual and financial costs that cancer imposes on human society is almost beyond belief. Just shut your eyes for a moment, take a deep breath and think of all the people you have known who have suf fered and died from cancer. " Parris concluded, " Even with my personal scientific philosophy of Nutrients First and my long-standing interest in selenium I am struggling to grasp the profound implications of these findings. " Strong statements from one of the most conservative @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ on target. The JAMA paper referred to was authored by Larry C. Clark, Ph.D., M.PH., internationally recognized for his research focused on the health benefits of selenium in humans, particularly in preventing cancer. It reported the results of a landmark ten-year, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving over 1300 subjects aged from 18 to 83. The proven cancer prevention benefits of 200 micrograms daily of the high selenium yeast used in Dr. Clark 's studies can so substantially reduce the risk of cancer from death that Parris commented, " I can not think of any other agent or pharmaceutical that is proven to cut the deaths from cancer by half in any human population anywhere in the world. " Although unblended, Dr. Clark 's original Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial has been extended for three years and continues to use SelenoExceII(TM) High Selenium Yeast. Recently the N.C.I.( the National Cancer Institute) announced that it has signed a clinical trial agreement through its division of cancer prevention with Cypress Systems, Inc. to promote the use @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ may lead to a New Drug Application( NDA) and a Biological License Application( BLA), The NDA and BLA are vehicles by which natural products like SelenoExcell are made widely available to cancer patients and to the general public as cancer prevention and control therapies. In that agreements such as these are typically researched for traditional drug companies it is a major breakthrough for a nutritional product to secure such a mainline position in clinical research. SelenoExcell has also been selected as the intervention agent in a series of cancer trials at the University of Arizona Cancer Center which were to be administered by Dr. Larry Clark who died on March 21, 2000 from complications related to prostate cancer. Unfortunately Dr. Clark 's cancer was not diagnosed until it had metastasized. However, he continued his research throughout several years of battling the disease, including the last six months of his life while Larry, Louanne, his wife, and Julia, his daughter, were supported by the services of hospice care. I believe that as the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ as well as several major international trials which have been initiated, are concluded selenium will be placed in the same category as vitamin C, folic acid and fiber as a basic imperative to our human existence. Larry Clark 's legacy will impact the world for generations to come. It is also Cypress Systems ' belief that in conjunction with current research efforts to develop effective treatments and potential cures for various forms of cancer, individuals should take an active role in cancer prevention. Many existing treatments for cancer are expensive and usually have unfavorable side effects associated with them. It is Cypress ' goal to assist people in increasing their knowledge about cancer prevention methods in order to make informed decisions about prevention strategies in health-related issues. To support this effort Paul Willis, president of Cypress Systems, has announced that baseball great Harmon Killebrew will join their public health education campaign to assist in efforts to build consumer awareness as to the need for an overall cancer prevention health program. " When I saw the results from Dr. Clarks @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ him in person several times I realized this is something people should know about, " Killebrew said. As a health-conscious male over 60, Killebrew can communicate the benefits of a comprehensive prostate cancer prevention program. As a sports hero and member of baseball 's Hall of Fame he is in a unique position to reach thousands of men who might otherwise tune out health news. In researching this article I had the opportunity to interview Louanne Clark and was touched by her passionate expression of how important the hospice care experience was to Larry, her daughter and herself over the last year of Larry 's life. Subsequently I became aware of Harmon Killebrew 's involvement as a consultant with the Vista Hospice Care Foundation located in Scottsdale, Arizona. Harmon was kind enough to introduce me to Barry M. Smith, VistaCare founder and president. After our discussion I asked VistaCare to contribute an article on their services for the benefit of totalhealth readers. The article appears on the following page. Ask anyone what the word hospice means and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it means care provided in the comfort of one 's own home. To others it means receiving care in an inpatient unit or " hospice home. " To Barry Smith, president of VistaCare, hospice is a philosophy of care designed to enhance the end of life experience and ensure that a patient 's remaining days are spent in peace and comfort. Photograph Harmon Killebrew and harry C. Clark, Pe.D., M.PH., discussing selenium research in Clark 's office. // Since its beginnings in 1967 the vision of hospice care has been to provide patients and their families with a positive, life-affirming experience. The hospice philosophy acknowledges that dying is part of the normal process of living but rather than focusing on the disease or its cure, hospice focuses on care. Likewise the philosophy of VistaCare, the second largest hospice provider in the United States, is to provide comprehensive care that provides for the psychosocial, emotional, spiritual and medical needs of terminally ill patients and their families. Major goals of hospice are to relieve @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ supportive care. This vision is as much a part of Smith 's personal life as it is his vocation. Driven by the less-than-peaceful events that accompanied the death of his brother, Smith has committed himself to providing patients and their families with the knowledge and support needed to prepare for and accept the loss of a loved one. " When my brother became ill, we really did n't know what to expect, " he explains. " The end came relatively quickly and we were n't prepared. We did n't know how or what to tell his children and it was extremely difficult to discuss it with each other. Having seen what hospice care can do, I know it would have made things much easier for all of us and that 's what I want others to experience. " This is why in 1995 Smith and three registered nurses launched the first VistaCare hospice in Scottsdale, Arizona. Today VistaCare serves 14 states with 42 operating sites. As Smith notes, however, grief and death are difficult @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ do not take advantage of hospice services until they are actively dying, " It is rare that a person enters the last phase of one 's life at peace and ready for life 's end, " says Dr. perry Fine, the national medical director for VistaCare and a founding member of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Fine explains : " Chronic illness and advanced disease states are often accompanied by feelings of isolation and loss, as well as a fear of physical pain. Likewise family members and loved ones are seldom prepared to acknowledge, much less accept, the imminent loss of that family member. Therefore it is very unfortunate that hospice care is often only sought when there is little time left for us to make a quality contribution. " If assistance is sought early, however, the hospice staff can do much to contribute to the experience. This is why Smith and the entire VistaCare staff are so committed to the idea of " open access " hospice care-a philosophy that distinguishes it from @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ are eligible for hospice care will be admitted and cared for, regardless of their financial situation or complexity of care needs. Specifically VistaCare hospice welcomes all eligible patients with limited life expectancy ; even those who are still involved with aggressive medical interventions that too commonly preclude admission to hospice, such as ventilator care or palliative chemotherapy/radiation therapy. Similarly, patients who are living alone without a caregiver will not be denied hospice care because of their social circumstances. " Naturally we encounter people at all stages of acceptance and in various stages of ongoing therapies-some beneficial and some that are useless or even harmful, " says Dr. Fine. " It is our mission to determine whether these treatments match the goals of the patient and to transition them to more meaningful care methods if their needs are not being met. " Ultimately patients want pain and symptom management, and they want to be assured that dying wo n't be inappropriately prolonged. They also want to maintain some measure of control over their care and to make sure they are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ have a strong preference to live out their lives in familiar surroundings rather than in a hospital setting. The objective of a hospice provider then is to provide exceptional palliative care for the patient and assure them that they will remain comfortable throughout their final journey. Hospice services can be delivered at several levels, depending upon the patients ' symptoms and families ' needs, including routine home care, general inpatient care, inpatient respite care and continuous care for times of crisis. Although the majority of hospice services are provided in the comfort and familiarity of the patient 's own home, the occasional need for a licensed inpatient facility may arise to provide relief from acute pain or symptoms or to offer respite for family caregivers. Regardless of where care is delivered, patients and their family members are supported by a team of healthcare professionals who are available 24 hours a day to answer questions, provide medical assistance or simply offer emotional support. Composed of the patient 's attending physician, the hospice physician, hospice nurses, home @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ coordinators and volunteers, this collaborative team requires each member to be both assertive and receptive and to take a leadership role within his/her area of expertise. This requires a willingness to communicate openly with all " stakeholders, " including the patient and family, and of course, the caregivers who are invested in this patient to one degree or another. " It is a privilege to care for these patients, " says Smith. " They rely on us to do the right thing in helping them through one of life 's most demanding transitions. And without the heart and soul of our staff, this important work could never be done. I applaud them for their abilities but most of all for their heart. Our staff is wholly dedicated to our mission of helping patients live all the days of their life in peace and comfort. " * Are you Medicare Certified? This question is critical, as the Medicare hospice benefits provides for all services related to the terminal diagnosis including medical supplies and equipment, pharmaceutical @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ * How involved can my own physician be in the decision-making process? The patient and his/her physician can and should determine the level of involvement. * Is there anything that would preclude me from being accepted as a hospice patient? Legally, if the patient is a Medicare Part A beneficiary and has an anticipated life expectancy of six months or less, then that patient is entitled to care by a Medicare certified hospice. If the patient 's physician and the hospice medical director have certified that the patient has a life-limiting illness with a prognosis of six months, VistaCare will gladly care for that individual regardless of financial or social circumstances. * Do other insurance plans cover hospice? Yes. Most plans have some hospice benefit. Your hospice can help you determine your coverage. * Do I have to have a primary caregiver in order to receive hospice care in my home? No. * Are there any limitations on the medical treatments you will provide? A quality hospice program should provide or support any service or medical @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of life. * What services do you provide? The hospice program should provide a combination of medical, emotional, spiritual and familial support including bereavement counseling, respite care and pain management. * How do you handle emergency situations? The hospice program you select should maintain a telephone line that answers calls 24 hours a day, seven days a week. On-call staff members should also be available for medical necessities on a 24-hour basis. * What if my condition improves? Occasionally a patient will experience substantially improved health with an extended prognosis. If this happens, the hospice program should transfer care to a non-hospice care provider. Later, when patients become eligible for hospice, they can re-elect the hospice benefit. There is no penalty for getting better. * How long does it take to get someone onto hospice care? With your approval, the admission process should begin immediately If you are ready, they should arrange for a nurse to evaluate you today. * What are the different levels of hospice care @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ nursing home. Routine home hospice care covers the services of the interdisciplinary hospice team, medications and equipment. Other categories of care are available when needed. INPATIENT CARE. Sometimes pain or symptoms can not be controlled at home and the patient is transported to a hospital or other inpatient care center. When the symptoms are under control, the patient returns home. RESPITE CARE. Many patients have their own caregivers, often family members. When caregivers need a rest from their caregiving responsibilities, patients can stay in a nursing home or hospice residential care center for up to five days. CONTINUOUS CARE. Sometimes a patient has a medical crisis that needs close medical attention. When this happens, we can arrange for inpatient care or VistaCare stafF can provide round-theclock care in the home. When the crisis is over, the patient returns to routine home care. <p> 
