2006341 COUNTRY COOKING Headnote Here 's to a healthy, happy New Year-one that 's all about what you can enjoy, not what you ca n't Headnote Nutrient-rich lemons, olive oil, tomatoes, red wine, garlic, onions, leafy greens, salmon, and soy are fabulous foods that not only taste good, but can also keep you healthy. PHOTOGRAPHY BY CHARLES SCHILLER. WRITTEN BY MAUREEN CALLAHAN. PRODUCED BY CHERYL SLOCUM AND CYNTHIA NICHOLSON. Photograph Photograph // January is often a month filled with lofty pronouncements about what we should n't or must n't eat. Every year we pledge to turn over a new leaf and repent from holiday indulgences. This year, instead of focusing on deprivation, look forward to adding healthful foods like red wine, salmon-even chocolate-to your menus. We have packed these and other superstar foods into tantalizing recipes like Roasted Garlic Soup and a spicy " Hot " Chocolate Cake. With dishes so appealing, it 's easy to forget that the ingredients harbor good-for-you " phytonutrients, " substances credited with warding off everything from the common cold to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ So make a New Year 's resolution to indulge in foods that taste good and just happen to promote good health. It 's far from a bitter pill to swallow. FOOD STYLING THROUGHOUT BY PAUL GRIMES. PROP STYLING BY BETTE BLAU. Above : Whole roasted onions stuffed with creamy parsnip puree and topped with a sprinkling of toasted walnuts and pungent Roquefort cheese are satisfying alone or alongside roasted meats. As a bonus, onions pack a big dose of " flavonoids, " a subclass of phytonutrients that might help ward off certain cancers and protect the heart. Left : The omega-3 oils in salmon are thought to promote healthy arteries and may also help treat depression and rheumatoid arthritis. Health benefits aside, there 's no quicker weeknight supper than our Pineapple- and Soy-Glazed Salmon. Slipped into the oven, it cooks in less than 10 minutes. The glaze includes a fermented soybean paste, one of whose phytonutrients, isoflavone, seems to mimic estrogen and could prevent breast and prostate cancers. citrus Photograph // citrus Above @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ flavors are a result of a marriage of sweet-tart preserved lemons and fresh whole lemons, buttery olives, fresh herbs, and tomatoes. Lemons contribute high amounts of vitamins C and B, which aid in the prevention of stomach cancer. All citrus fruits( especially the peel. as used in this recipe) contain generous quantities of disease-fighting phytonutrients. dark leafy greens Strips of smoky bacon and sauteed collard greens are tossed with a warm vinaigrette for our Hot Collard Slaw. Easy to make but complex in flavor, this side dish is loaded with nutrients that keep your eyes and bones healthy Preliminary research indicates that dark leafy greens support the immune system and may ward off certain types of cancer. These greens are also rich in folic acid, a nutrient critical for fighting anemia and preventing some birth defects. garlic, tomatoes, and olive oil Top left : For a good punch of infection -- fighting garlic, which also lowers blood pressure and may help prevent stomach cancer, serve up bowls of Roasted Garlic Soup. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ soothing texture. Lycopene, a powerful cancer-fighting antioxidant, is abundant in the tomato -- whether raw, cooked, or dried. Our Fire -- Roasted Tomato Soup( easily made with canned tomatoes) becomes a savory weapon against cancer. Top right : Bagna Cauda, a pungent dip, is loaded with heart-healthy olive oil and antioxidants. Plunge crisp vegetables or crusty bread into this warm blend of oil, anchovies, and garlic. Right : Made with an olive-oil crust and a drizzle of herb-infused olive oil, our Tomato and Camembert Tart provides a double dose of a healthful Ingredient. FONDUE POT( TOP RIGHT) : BODUM. FOR RESOURCES, SEE ADDRESS INDEX. chocolate Above : That one of life 's great indulgences, chocolate, might also prove beneficial to health is good news, indeed. And what better way to enjoy those benefits than in chocolate cake? We call this one " Hot " Chocolate Cake because it pairs rich cocoa and bittersweet chocolate with a hint of spicy cayenne pepper-a warming choice @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ chocolate is extracted seem to have the same powerful antioxidants found in red wine and tea. At last, chocolate can be enjoyed fully guilt free. PLEASE TURN TO THE RECIPE FILE IN THIS ISSUE TO PREPARE THESE DISHES. red wine Below : The well-publicized health benefits-reduced risk of heart disease and cancer-associated with consuming a moderate amount of red wine daily do n't come only from sipping a little cabernet or merlot. Cooking or reducing wine concentrates its flavors without altering its potent antioxidants, called phenols. So add red wine to a winter dessert like our Spiced Figs in Port Wine. Port, a fortified wine, is simmered with honey, dried figs, and spices to create lusciously soft fruit and a thick, burgundy-colored syrup that adds complex flavors and dramatic color to a serving of frozen yogurt. Photograph Photograph Photograph // <p> 
