2010041. Lying alone in the Atlantic swells, this stranded piece of Rhode Island has become a favorite stop for well-traveled boaters. IF FIRST IMPRESSIONS ARE THE DEEPEST, THEN IT 'S NO wonder Block Island resides securely in the heart and memory of many a mariner. Whether it 's the stunning sight of Mohegan Bluffs as you approach from the south, the lonely outpost of North Light or the broad embrace of the Great Salt Pond, fetching Block Island the first time is unforgettable. Once you 've made landfall, it 's hard not to be enchanted by the history, natural beauty, 17 miles of beaches, breathtaking views of the sea from atop 200-foot cliffs, great food and lovely architecture. Its location -- about 22 nautical miles from Newport, 14 from Point Judith and 18 from Montauk Point -- adds to its allure. Block Island is just far enough away to be distinctly its own world, yet close enough to be convenient. Most boaters stay in the Great Salt Pond, or New Harbor, a 625-acre bay that opens through a narrow channel @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 14 feet, but you can expect a three- to four-knot current during the tidal peaks. Once inside, you may tie up at Champlin 's Marina, Block Island Boat Basin or Payne 's Dock -- all toward the Pond 's eastern end. The town of New Shoreham maintains 90 first-come, first-served moorings from Memorial to Columbus days, and there 's an anchorage to the east. Between Champlin 's and the Boat Basin, there 's a long crescent of beach to land a dinghy. All Rhode Island waters are no-discharge zones, and three boats are available for free pump-outs( hail on Channel 73). If you see a small boat buzzing around offering fresh-baked goods, do n't hesitate to hail it, as well. Aldo 's Bakery has been treating boating visitors to fresh pies, muffins and goodies for years, and it 's a delectable way to start the day. On the island 's eastern side, Old Harbor is the heart of the " downtown " and a National Historic District. It @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ R.I, and New London, Conn., but has limited town dockage( stern-to the bulkhead and rafted off) and a tiny anchorage. Ballard 's Wharf at the well-known beachfront Ballard 's Inn has eight new slips for transients. Without question, the best way to see Block Island is by bicycle. Rental shops are all over the place. From the saddle of a bicycle, you 'll hear the shush of breeze over the high, stone-walled meadows, the crash of waves on the rocks and beaches below, and the huge variety of songbirds. Block Island has 25 miles of walking trails through greenways and nature preserves and approximately 365 ponds. A gorgeous morning is a bike ride to Rodman 's Hollow, followed by a walk through this glacial out-wash to the edge of high cliffs and Black Rock Beach below. Ride back to town for lunch, then bike to the quieter north end and see Settler 's Rock, which marks where the first English settlers landed in 1661. On the way back, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ can take in Block Island in a day, but you 'll certainly want it to last longer. BOX WHERE TO STAY In the Great Salt Pond( New Harbor) : Champlln 's Marina,( 401) 466-2641, www.champlinsresort.com ; Block Island Boat Basin,( 401) 466-2631 ; Payne 's Dock,( 401) 466-5572, harbormaster on Channel 12. In Old Harbor : Old Harbor Town Dock, Channel 12 ; Ballard 's Wharf,( 401) 466-2231. For more information : www.blockisland.com ; **26;2374;TOOLONG ; and www.blockislandguide.com. BOX COPING WITH FOG The foggiest month is June, says Chris Willi, Block Island 's harbormaster. Sometimes the island may be clear but the fog bank is offshore, other times fog shrouds Block Island. The best way to deal with fog is to have radar, GPS, a chartplotter and the experience to know how to use them. " We have 22 ferries entering Old Harbor daily, " Willi says, " and the boat traffic around the island is pretty high @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ should n't be out there. " Charter Captain Denny Dillon agrees and says at the very least every boat should have a radar reflector onboard " to make yourself visible. " If you get caught in fog, sound your foghorn regularly and reduce your speed. Finally, do n't box yourself in to having to leave on a particular day. " What I tell people is, if the weather 's bad, do you really need to leave? " Willi says. " There are worse places to be stuck. " PULLQUOTE Its location-about 22 nautical miles from Newport and 18 from Montauk-adds to its allure. Block Island is far enough away to be its own world, yet close enough to be convenient. Author Affiliation <p> 
