4021941 PROOF POSITIVE With a twenty-three-foot-long bar made of pewter handcrafted in France, flat-screen monitors displaying pieces from the National Portrait Gallery 's collection( on a continuous loop) and a selection of antique Chinese chests( an homage to neighboring Chinatown), PROOF, a new wine bar in Washington, D.C., is both stylish and eclectic. : Gather for a glass( or a bottle) at Proof wine bar, in Washington, D.C. If you 're staying for just a drink, you can stop by the bar and order one of the more than forty wines available by the glass. If you plan to try the cuisine, after you 've settled into a dark-chocolate-colored booth, be sure to peruse Proof 's 1,150-bottle-strong wine list, which includes Rhne varietals, California cult wines and much-coveted Bordeaux. As you enjoy your choice, explore executive chef Haidar Karoum 's Mediterranean-inspired offerings, among them a grilled lamb burger with chickpea fries, a miso-glazed sablefish and delicate gnocchi. A raw-food section, charcuterie and artisanal cheeses round out the menu. Sticky toffee pudding on a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ cream, is a delightful way to top it all off. 775 G Street NW ; 202-737-7663 ; proofdc.com. MONICA BHIDE A NEW HOME FOR NEWS The history of news gathering( and all of its attendant issues, from muckraking to censorship, yellow journalism to libel) has finally been deemed worthy of a world-class museum, the just-opened NEWSEUM, on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C. The six-story limestone building, designed by Polshek Partnership, contains 250,000 square feet of theaters and interactive exhibits created to help the general public learn more about the sometimes perilous and occasionally scurrilous business of reporting. Replacing a former, smaller institution of the same name in Rosslyn, Virginia, this cavernous attraction sits, appropriately enough, a stone 's throw from the Capitol -- a building whose occupants frequently find themselves in the media 's crosshairs. 555 Pennsylvania Avenue NW ; 888-639-7386 ; newseum.org. T.P.F. : display cases at the newseum contain periodicals dating almost as far back as 500 years. FAVORITE FIND On the fifth floor, keep an eye @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ produced on U.S. soil, Andrew Bradford 's American Magazine, published in 1741. AN URBAN GARDEN CLIFTON NURSERIES, a popular gardening center in London, brings calm to fashionable Little Venice, just north of London 's Notting Hill. Founded in 1851, this 1.5-acre oasis has belonged to Lord Jacob Rothschild since the 1970s and attracts local celebrity regulars Jude Law and Kate Moss. Clifton 's line of latticework seats and benches is available in a range of timbers -- notably oak and responsibly sourced teak and iroko -- and can be customized and shipped to order. While you 're there, grab a bite to eat at Carole Bamford 's Daylesford Organic Caf, which occupies a former conservatory within the nursery. If you see a cat prowling among the shrubs, that would be Beebop, the feline belonging to Ringo Starr 's daughter, who lives next door. " He keeps the mice on their toes, " says nursery manager Guy Pullen. 5A Clifton Villas ; 011-44-20-7289-6851 ; www.clifton.co.uk. RORY ROSS : a profusion of color @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Style setter Davinia Wang has plucked her favorite shoes and accessories off the runways of Paris and brought them to EDON MANOR, a new Tribeca salon named for her family 's estate near Oxford, England. : The lavish wares of Edon Manor, in New York 's Tribeca. Hong Kong-born, London-raised and Parsons-educated, Wang says she was underwhelmed by the assortment of high-fashion merchandise available in most retail shops, so she enlisted designer Ryan Korban to be her creative director and to design the space -- one that 's filled with white timber, sea-foam-colored drapery and matching canopied chairs. It 's a dreamy environment in which she showcases limited runs of items by Derek Lam, Azzedine Alaa, Sergio Rossi and Givenchy, among others. Givenchy 's buttery-soft white goatskin booties with chunky heels are $635, while the designer 's knee-high, gladiator-style sandals are $1,750. An Alaa corset belt in black patent leather is $1,300 ; a gunmetal-gray stingray clutch by Carmen Ho is $800. Lam 's dove-gray Astrid wedges are $675, and his @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, is $1,290. Also available are sunglasses by Lanvin, Proenza Schouler and Chlo, and multicolored hosiery by Fogal. 391 Greenwich Street ; 212-431-3890. SUZANNE GANNON A Taste of the City If the mere mention of flavors such as zabaglione, torroncino, fragola and cocco makes you long for the gelato shops of Italy, satisfaction may be close at hand. When Italian entrepreneurs Federico Grom and Guido Martinetti unveiled their gelateria, GROM, on New York 's Upper West Side, the perennial lines around the block only heightened the buzz. A year later, downtown residents have a Grom outpost of their own, in Greenwich Village. On a hot summer night you 're almost guaranteed to encounter a wait, but the taste -- we promise -- will arouse vivid memories of the last stracciatella you ate in Rome. 2165 Broadway ; 233 Bleecker Street ; grom.it. T.P.F. : grom 's ruby-red-grapefruit gelato. THE TUTOR DIARIES After reading SCHOOLED( Hyperion ; $23.95), any parent of a seventh grader at a New York City @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ move to North Dakota. I sure would. Anisha Lakhani 's novel is about a young woman who begins her career teaching English in Manhattan and starts moonlighting as a highly paid private tutor. She soon winds up writing papers for her twelve-year-old clients and selling her academic soul to upgrade from Nine West loafers to Marni stilettos. Her Upper East Side world of wealthy parents who spoil their offspring will make you laugh, but the moral issue of raising children who believe that good grades can be bought as easily as a week in St. Bart 's will make you think. Schooled is witty, entertaining and altogether tantalizing. JOAN CARAGANIS JACOBSON 
