2002241 In addition to sleeker lines, Chevrolet 's redesigned Venture now has a shorter, lower nose that greatly improves the view of the road ahead. // JUDGED SOLELY on image, the minivan comes up short against the upstart, more rugged sport-utility vehicle. But for the road trip, a softball game, the carpool, or any of a long list of domestic chores, minivans remain the ultimate people move and cargo carrier. And tgere 's nothing ho-hum about the soccetr mom 's best friend, either. Performing a multitude of tasks - and carrying out each at least reasonably well - is nothing to scoff at. Accomplishing these feats of versatility has been a continuing challenge for manufactures, which are faced with designing supensions stiff enough to handle widely varing loads without sacrificing ride comfort, building in enough structure to withstand a crash without stealing precious interior space, and juggling the need for acceleration and fuel economy. For buyers, flexibility and ease of use reign supreme. Comfortable seats with multiple configurations, easy entry and exit, spacious cargo compartments and passenger room @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ measured. Chysler set the standard in 1983 with its steel-bodied, shortnosed front-wheel-drive Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager, and this platform still dominates the market. Variations come and go. Until this year, for example, Ford split its efforts among the reardrive Aerostar and two front-wheeldrive minivans-the short-wheelbase Mercury Villager and the larger Ford Windstar. The demise of the Aerostar at the end of the ' 97 model year leaves Ford with the two front-drivers. GM is the most recent domestic manufacturer to emulate Chrysler, shifting from the composite-bodied, front-drive series that it sold through its Olds, Pontiac, and Chevrolet divisions from 1990 to 1996. After carefully studying the competition, the automaker 's engineers have outfitted the Chevrolet Venture, Pontiac Trans Sport, and Oldsmobile Silhouette vans with an all-new steel body. GM now offers its new vans in two wheelbase sizes : 112- and 120-inch. For our comparison test, we selected the short-wheelbase Venture and long-wheelbase Trans Sport( with the sporty Montana package) to sample the difference. To spice @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @( introduced last spring), which features a new, wider driver's-side door. Chrysler was represented by its most efficient package : the short-wheelbase Voyager with an upgraded 150-horsepower four-cylinder engine.( The latter is obviously at a power disadvantage in comparison with the V6 engines in the GM and Ford minivans, but other powerplants are available.) Rebuilt from the ground up, the new GM minivans have taken a cue from their counterparts at Ford and Chrysler in abandoning what was GM 's most distinctive feature-the steel space frame and all-composite body. The combination had a lackluster stiffness-to-weight ratio ; the allsteel structure is quieter and stiffer, vastly improving ride and handling. GM engineers next addressed the biggest single flaw in earlier GM minivans : poor forward visibility. The long hoodlines on previous models earned them the uncomplimentary nickname " dustbusters. " The longish fronts also made parallel parking a bit dicey. Later versions boasted a shorter nose, but sensing the van 's front edges while parking was still tricky. This latest package is a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the windshield wipers are hidden from view. Retained is the most ingenious feature : lightweight, individually removable rear seats. A new optional driver's-side sliding door follows up on Chrysler 's successful introduction of this feature ; GM has a distinctive, electrically operated passenger's-side slider as well. Photograph The interior of the Plymouth Voyager favors legroom over cargo space in this shortwheelbase version. The longer-wheelbase model has more luggage capacity. Rollers on the seats( below right) make it simple to remove either the rear or middle seats for more cargo room, as well as to push the seats after they are outside the vehicle. Photograph In GM 's new minivans, lightweight modular seating folds into several combinations, with the seatbacks doubling as small tables or folding down for a flat, shelf-like storage area, creating the most flexible interior arrangement( above left) in the test group. As shown here in the Chevrolet Venture, cargo netting and bins abound for storing odds and ends. // The Venture has the shortest wheelbase in the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ length, however, is the 72-inch width. That cuts significantly into cargo and passenger space, especially shoulder room. Even the longwheelbase version of the Venture, the Trans Sport, has less passenger room than the short-wheelbase Voyager. The extra space created by the rectangular upper body of the Venture and Trans Sport compensates somewhat. The modular seats are easy to add or remove. They can be configured into five seating groups, including an eight-passenger setup( on the Trans Sport), and the seatbacks fold into a table-like affair. Though comfortable, the seats-particularly in the rear-offer less lower back support than do Ford 's and Chrysler 's. And although GM advertises its theater seating, the forward view from the rear seats remains slightly restricted. Upon first impression, the electric door is clever as well as fun. You 'll be tempted to smugly impress friends by opening the door with the keyfob hidden in your pocket. And you can avoid getting trampled by the softball team after you open the door. But @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a process that 's ponderously slow compared with manual operation. The 3.4-liter V6 that powers both the Venture and Trans Sport is smooth, accelerates moderately well in comparison with the other test vehicles, and matches the smaller Voyager four-cylinder 's fuel economy on the highway. The GM duo 's handling is downright sprightly compared with that of previous GM minivans. Feedback from the steering wheel is noticeably lacking, however, detracting a bit from the pleasure of highway driving. Against the new GM lineup, Ford 's Windstar stands out as something of a one-man team. Offered as a single model with a 120.7-inch-wheelbase( the short-wheelbase variation is represented by the Mercury Villager), the Windstar offers two V6 engine options : a 3.0-liter 150-hp powerplant and a 3.8-liter 200-hp version. The Windstar is narrower than the Voyager and wider than the GM entries, but its rounded roofline costs interior space up high. The interior layout is simple and efficient, with comfortable seats and good visibility front and rear. The addition of a ceiling-mounted mirror @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ expand the rear cargo area quickly. The new oversize driver 's door, however, is only a stopgap substitute for a left-side slider. The door does n't add much rear-seat access, and when it 's opened to its first stopping point, there is less room to climb in or out than with a shorter door. This can be a problem in tight parking spaces. The new left-side sliding doors on the GM and Chrysler vans are superior, particularly if you often use them to stow packages or other cargo in the second row of seats. The highway feel is solid and the steering is precise, marred only by the steering wheel 's habit of abruptly snapping back to center as you come out of a slow-speed turn. Our 200-hp test vehicle was the quickest of any in this group. The Windstar 's ride is outstanding-cushiest of the lot, but at the expense of considerable body roll. This smoothness shows in the interior as well, such as in the slick operation of the electrical switches. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the least power in the group-albeit at the lowest price-ended up showing class in the stretch. The new 150-hp four-cylinder is smooth, more powerful, and unobtrusive, handling at least an unloaded van with aplomb. The high-efficiency engine is worth considering if you frequently drive without cargo. Handling, with a relatively slow steering ratio, is sometimes ponderous, but the highway feel is solid and precise. A superior package and attractive, aerodynamic shape distinguish the Voyager. The seating is nicely contoured, airy, and comfortable. Thanks to the downward slope of the area forward of the instrument panel, the front view is expansive. A low beltline aids visibility to the side and rear. Photograph You can open the optional electric door( left on GM 's minivans from afar by pressing a button on the keyfob. The door also can also be activated from the driver 's seat or by a button near the door itself. The longwheelbase Pontiac Trans Sport( right) has more cargo room than the short-wheelbase model, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ now has an expanded driver'sside door for a bit of additional access to the rear seats. Interior features include an overhead console that comes with a fold-down, panoramic rear-view mirror mounted in the ceiling( above), which allows you to see what the kids are doing in the back. That is, if you really want to know. // The aforementioned left-side door set a welcome trend when it was introduced. The trademark rear seat, which can be moved forward and backward, is the easiest full-size rear seat to remove completely. The middle seat is removable as well. The extra width is welcome, although Chrysler manages its edge in passenger volume at the expense of rear cargo room in the short-wheelbase version. That 's one reason for the popularity of the stretch. Slightly smaller and slightly more expensive than the other vans in our test group, the Venture and Trans Sport are dramatic additions to GM 's minivan fleet. The flexibility provided by the various seating arrays helps these minivans stand out. Handling @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Chrysler still holds advantages in design and interior room, while Ford has the plushest ride and the tightest interior assembly work. The spread between these minivans has thus narrowed to become more a matter of taste than of superiority. The car-like handling, combined with the best use of interior space and the laundry list of convenience features virtually unmatched by any other vehicle type, may not offset the current infatuation with oversize and overweight sport-utilities. But when logic and practicality count, the minivan more than manages to hold its own. // <p> 
