4155141 Section : WHAT 'S NEW? # Piaymobil is a world of play in miniature. By appealing to a child 's imagination, Playmobil 's themes from the past, present, and future encourage young minds to develop and understand the world around them. Everyday situations can be re-created through role-play for hours of unlimited fun. # New to the Piaymobil playlist : # Four Limited Edition 40th Anniversary Compact Sets that each include a bonus : Knight 's Tournament( bonus Cannon Wagon) ; Pony Pasture( bonus Pony Wagon) ; Fire Rescue Operation( bonus Quad) ; and Princess Island( bonus Romantic Gondola). All princesses are welcome at the Unicorn Jewel Castle, where she can sleep in a bed decorated with sparkling jewels -- and the secret hiding place at Magic Crystal Lake contains a treasure chest. Spend the day shopping at the new Furnished Shopping Mall. Browse through the latest styles at the Clothing Boutique, or have your hair styled at the Beauty Salon. There even is a Piaymobil Toy Shop filled with miniature Piaymobil toys. The Family Camping Trip @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Camp Site. At night, everyone will sleep peacefully in a Pop-Up Tent. The next morning, take a shower and then enjoy a snack at the Camping Cafe. Embark on an outdoor adventure with Mountain Life. Take the Cable Car up the mountain, enjoy the Festival, go rock climbing, or spend time at the Alpine Lodge, which has a cozy fireplace and an attic where you can take a nap after such an eventful day. # Of course, no month of December is complete -- or nearly as much fun -- without a Piaymobil " Advents Kalendar. " There are plenty of choices for themes, including Santa 's Workshop, Unicorn Fairyland, Dragon 's Treasure Battle, Pirates Treasure Cove, and many others. # For those traveling this holiday season, keep in mind that there is a Piaymobil Fun Park in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., that is open seven days a week. Go to www.playmobil.us to learn more about the 40th anniversary celebration, product line, and theme park @ @ 
