4083941 The season 's best books, for every personality. FOR THE ROMANTIC In November 2008, New York Times reporter David Rohde was kidnapped in Afghanistan. For the next seven months, he was held captive while back in New York, his wife, Kristen Mulvihill, fought to bring him home. Alternately told from Rohde 's and Mulvihill 's perspectives, A Rope and a Prayer : A Kidnapping from Two Sides( Viking) is part love story, part thriller, part war story -- and a mesmerizing narrative. FOR THE HISTORIAN Some women are great beauties. Some are brilliant strategists. Cleopatra, the subject of Stacy Schiff 's new biography, was both. Cleopatra : A Life( Little, Brown) is not only a vivid realization of the shimmering world of Egypt 's last queen, it 's also a dissection of a court so fraught with power struggles that it makes Elizabeth I 's reign look like a walk in the park. FOR THE FOODIE Before Julia Child was, well, Julia Child, she was a diplomat 's wife with a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of a life lived abroad. In As Always, Julia : The Letters of Julia Child and Avis DeVoto( Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), the collected correspondence between Child and her pen pal Avis DeVoto, we learn of Child 's struggle to write her cookbook and of her great humor and observational gifts. DeVoto, a lovely and engaging writer herself, eventually became Child 's ad hoc literary agent : has an epistolary friendship ever yielded such delicious results? FOR THE FICTION LOVER Of all his books, Henry James considered The Ambassadors -- a tale of European sophistication running up against American navet -- his finest. Now, in Foreign Bodies( Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), Cynthia Ozick has taken the premise of The Ambassadors and tweaked it : her heroine, Bea Nightingale, is, like James 's hero, sent to Paris to retrieve a young relative who 's fallen in thrall to a life abroad. But here the similarities end. The result is a novel that pays homage to a great work even as it @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ thoughtful activity, but thinkers tend to look down on it, " writes Robin Lane Fox in the introduction to Thoughtful Gardening( Basic Books), his collection of witty essays about the pleasures of working the land. Fox, the longtime gardening columnist at the Financial Times, finds delights everywhere from Capri to China, but his greatest inspiration seems to be home : England. FOR THE JEWELRY LOVER Ruth Peltason 's sumptuous Living Jewels : Masterpieces from Nature( Vendome) is a celebration of jewelry fashioned from organic materials -- stones, yes, but also amber, horn, ivory, shell, and wood. We particularly love the Van Cleef &; Arpels coral, diamond, and chalcedony Rose de Noel suite on page 53. FOR THE NOSTALGIST Next month marks the fiftieth anniversary of President Kennedy 's inauguration -- and the beginning of the thousand days that begat the modern American presidency. Portrait of Camelot : A Thousand Days in the Kennedy White House( Abrams) is a moving compilation of White House photographer Cecil @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the most intimate pictures are of John Jr. and Caroline, who are shown mugging for the camera -- for the moment wholly carefree. FOR THE TRAVELER What did jet-setters do before Louis Vuitton? In the mid-1800s, when trains and ships began democratizing travel, the company started producing its now-iconic trunks. Some of LV 's favorite custom creations( including a 2009 crimson-suede-lined box for an indulged daughter 's PlayStation 3) are in Pierre Lonforte and ric Pujalet-Pla 's Louis Vuitton : 100 Legendary Trunks( Abrams) -- proof that traveling in style is as fun as the destination itself. PHOTOGRAPH BY MARKO METZINGER/STUDIO D Photograph : 6 <br> PHOTOGRAPH BY MARKO METZINGER/STUDIO D, STYLED BY JOHN OLSON Indexing( document details) 
