2027541 THE LAST BOOK that Jonathan Edwards prepared for publication sports an ornery title : Two Dissertations.( I) Concerning the End for which GOD created the World.( II) The Nature of True Virtue. Nor is this work memorable in others ways that often distinguish religious " classics. " It does not possess the personal intensity of Thomas a Kempis 's Imitation of Christ or Pascal 's Pensees nor the compelling narrative of, say, Malcolm Muggeridge 's Chronicle of Wasted Time. To complicate matters, the two parts of the book have often been published separately. Finally, it is filled with rarefied argument, abstractions abound, and many pages of Concerning the End for which GOD created the World sail through heavy seas of concentrated biblical citation. This is, in other words, not the kind of volume to be measured in a 700-word review or one whose author would be a likely candidate for the call-in shows. Still, a fairly simple conviction drives its recondite argumentation. The reason for the pairing of the two essays has been neatly summarized by the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ decade or so of his life to preparing this work and several of Edwards 's related writings for publication. According to Ramsey, the propensity of earlier publishers to bring out the treatises separately betrayed a fundamental misunderstanding of their inner connection : " The " end " for which God created the world must be the " end " of a truly virtuous and holy life "( The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Vol. B : Ethical Writings, Yale University Press, 1989). Edwards, though he spins out definitions and considers objections with exhaustive patience, nonetheless can also make his case succinctly. For Part I : " All that is ever spoken of in the Scripture as an ultimate end of God 's works is included in that one phrase, " the glory of God ' '. " For Part II : " ' T is evident that true virtue must chiefly consist in love to God ; the Being of beings, infinitely the greatest and best of beings. " In other words, the world @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ purposes, especially the happiness of the human creature, are subordinate to that one great end. Correspondingly, genuine virtue is found only in deeds motivated by a heart captured by the divine glory. While " secondary " or " natural " virtue -- like deeds motivated by love of family, country or friends -- is found among all humans, only those whom God has drawn into the kingdom may approach " true virtue, " because only they do good deeds in order to glorify God. From these summaries, it is quickly apparent that the major impediment to considering Edwards 's Two Dissertations a " classic " is not its abstruse style but its blunt contradiction of the ruling assumptions of our day. Where we are now into diversity, Edwards is abrasively particularistic -- virtue will be defined in one way, or it is not virtue. Where we are preoccupied with the creature, Edwards is besotted with the Creator -- God as the Being of beings defines his own place in the cosmos along with the places @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ our ability to preserve our planet, Edwards is blithely optimistic about the future -- he is convinced of the eternality, no less than the infinity, of the divine goodness ; he does not doubt for an instant that the Being of Beings will prevail. Edwards made sure that no one would miss his message. He concluded Concerning the End by pairing a contentious conviction that was already controversial in his own day with a piercing affirmation of the sort that has left admirers -- from his pupils Samuel Hopkins and Joseph Bellamy to savants among our contemporaries like Ramsey, Sang Lee and Robert Jenson -- breathless : " God aims at satisfying justice in the eternal damnation of sinners ; which will be satisfied by their damnation, considered no otherwise than with regard to its eternal duration. But yet there never will come that particular moment, when it can be said, that now justice is satisfied. But if this do n't satisfy our modern freethinkers, who do n't like the talk about satisfying justice with an infinite punishment @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ that God, in glorifying the saints in heaven with eternal felicity, aims to satisfy his infinite grace or benevolence, by the bestowment of a good infinitely valuable, because eternal ; and yet there never will come the moment, when it can be said, that now this infinitely valuable good has been actually bestowed. " For its boldness in affirming a God-centered vision of the universe -- and even more, a God-centered rendering of the human condition -- Edwards 's Two Dissertations remains one of the most striking works of modern religious thought. Concerning the End is made up of two parts. First comes an argument from the nature of things contending that, if we take for granted that the cosmos had a creator, we must also take for granted that the ultimate purpose of the cosmos is the Creator 's own praise. While the metaphysically minded may find such reasoning impressive, most Christian readers will probably be more deeply moved by the extensive range of scripture that Edwards discusses in the second part. These are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ glory, " " for my name 's sake, " and related terms. The range and diversity of such passages from both testaments is even more impressive than Edwards 's learned discussion of them. In the Yale edition, Ramsey shows how Edwards first gathered such passages out of concordances early in his ministerial career during the 1720s, and continued to mull them over, classify them and steep himself in their implications for another 30 years before writing Concerning the End. A similar process of note-taking, trial argumentation and private meditation on the work of contemporary ethicists lies behind The Nature of True Virtue.( Yale 's forthcoming publication of Edwards 's Miscellanies, which contain the bulk of those private annotations, will offer profoundly rewarding insights into the development of Edwards 's thought.) In The Nature of True Virtue Edwards responds specifically to what historian Norman Fiering has called the " new moral philosophy " of the 18th century -- that is, the sentimental ethics that was sweeping the English-speaking world in the works of the Earl @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @) and Samuel Clarke( 1675-1720). In just a few pages( only 88 pages in the Yale edition), Edwards raises the polemical stakes very high. He argues, first, that the conclusions of the new moralists are true, but only in their proper place. Because God has communicated certain aspects of his own image to all humanity, Edwards agrees with the philosophers of benevolence that natural conscience possesses a prudential value in regulating conduct, that sentiments of symmetry and beauty provide insights into the nature of human morality, that pity and familial affection stabilize society, and that a natural " moral sense " reveals some truths about the ethical world. Second, however, Edwards insists that the socially useful benefits of natural virtue fall far short of true virtue. For Edwards, the unshakable foundation of virtue worthy of the name is " that supreme regard to God, and love to him laid as the foundation, and all other virtues handled in a connection with this, and in subordination to it @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ he had previously asserted for the inner spiritual life in his Treatise on Religions Affections( 1746) and for conversion in his Freedom of the Will( 1754) -no truly good thing, strictly speaking, exists that is not always and everywhere dependent upon God. Third, and in his most complicated argument, Edwards tries to show that the virtue described by the new moral philosophers -- where individuals are drawn by natural capacities to love the beautiful and pursue the good -- is not truly virtuous at all. Edwards suggests that pity, conscience, natural passions and natural love of family are no more than species of prudence, self-seeking and self-love. Edwards thinks more highly of these secondary vi than did some of his followers( Samuel Hopkins, for instance, thought that benevolence must contradict self-love, Edwards only that true benevolence transcended self-love, but his chief purpose in the last major section of The Nature of True Virtue is to deny the status of true virtue to naturally occurring sentiments. Philosophically, Edwards 's argument @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ mind. He wants to show that the ethics of Shaftesbury and Hutcheson are just as intellectualist as the intellectualism of Aristotle against which the " new moral philosophers " set their supposedly affectional ethics. Theologically, Edwards wants to defend the particularity of grace ; he wishes, in other words, to demonstrate that only the unique, unsurpassing goodness of God can be a legitimate source for true virtue. Together, the Two Dissertations attempted in the 18th century what Philip Watson once described as Martin Luther 's main concern in the 16th century -- the promotion of a theological " Copernican revolution " in which anthropocentric instincts are transformed into a theocentric picture of reality. For Edwards, however, it is a " Copernican counterrevolution. " Hutcheson, Shaftesbury and Clarke were stressing natural human capacities and the ability of humans to perceive the lawlike regularities of the psyche in a manner analogous to the way their exalted contemporary, Sir Isaac Newton, was demonstrating the lawlike regularities of the physical world. The ethicists were providing justification for the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Edwards, with only a few others of his contemporaries, felt that when ethics was defined( however brilliantly) as a function of innate human possibilities and when nature was defined( however persuasively) as matter in regular motion, the result was to subvert a realistic understanding of the world. The French Catholic Nicholas Malebranche and the Anglican bishop George Berkeley agreed and, in ways appropriate to their theological traditions, attempted similar arguments to show, philosophically and ethically, why all worldviews must collapse into selfishness and chaos unless based on the being and goodness of God. But beyond Edwards, Berkeley and Malebranche, there were not many -- Roman Catholic, state-church Protestant or revivalist evangelical -- who resisted the tide of the times that was putting human nature at the center of things. LITTLE MORE than a century after publication of Two Dissertations, Edwards 's message had become almost incomprehensible to many intelligent Americans. In 1880 Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote a long essay on Edwards that lauded his character and logical abilities. But @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it was another matter. They were " not only false, not only absurd, but... disorganizing forces in the midst of the thinking apparatus. " Holmes did not equivocate : Edwards 's system seems, in the light of today, to the last degree barbaric, mechanical, materialistic, pessimistic. If he had lived a hundred years later, and breathed the air of freedom, he could not have written with such old-world barbarism.... The truth is that his whole system of beliefs... is gently fading out of enlightened human intelligence, and we are hardly in a condition to realize what a tyranny it once exerted over many of the strongest minds. Twenty years later, Mark Twain was less patronizing but more savage : After he stayed up late one evening to read Edwards 's Freedom of the Will he concluded that the author was a " drunken lunatic, " a " resplendent intellect gone mad -- a marvelous spectacle... By God I was ashamed to be in such company. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ humanity could better itself, or Twain, who felt that nothing at all -- and least of all a tyrant-deity -- could help humanity, Edwards was little more than a historical curiosity. The secret of the revival of interest in Edwards that has occurred since the 1930s may well lie precisely where Holmes and Twain found greatest offense. In Perry Miller 's provocative judgment with which he began his influential biography of Edwards in 1949, " there come periods, either through disaster or self-knowledge, when applied science and Benjamin Franklin 's The Way to Wealth " are not enough. Since most of the 20th century has been such a period, we may be in a position to hear Edwards more clearly than was the progressive generation of Holmes. Whatever the exact reason, interest in Edwards -- and especially his theology -- may be higher now than it has ever been, even in his own day. Edwards 's biographer M. X. Lesser has estimated that the number of academic dissertations on Edwards has doubled every decade over the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Religious Experience, published by Scribner 's in 1988, contains far more references to Edwards than to any other single figure. Not long ago the workshops publishing the papers of Edwards and Benjamin Franklin, both at Yale, held an extraordinarily successful conference on the two 18th-century giants. In January of this year two new academic conferences were announced to consider Edwards 's life and work. The splendid Yale edition of Edwards 's works has been the most visible fruit of the remarkable revival of interest. JUST AS remarkable has been the revival of interest among what might be considered Edwards 's natural heirs, Protestant evangelicals. For a number of reasons, however, the theocentric emphasis of Edwards has played a remarkably small role in the history of evangelical Protestants. To be sure, evangeiicals published, read and reread Edwards 's writings on revival and the spiritual life( his edition of missionary David Brainerd 's diary, for example, has never been out of print). But they have not shown equal interest in the theology @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ its emphasis on human choice, has dominated much evangelical theology, and it is very different from the theocentric awakenings that Edwards promoted in his subtle analysis of revival. Moreover, the anti-intellectualism nourished by evangelicals could not be further removed from Edwards 's patient attention to what we would today call psychology, metaphysics and natural science. But in these latter days even evangelicals are reappropriating the theology of Edwards. Beginning in the 1950s with the Welsh preacher Martin Lloyd-Jones and a British publisher, the Banner of Truth Trust, Edwards 's substantial theological works were once again put to use in evangelical circles. More recently, Richard Lovelace of Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary has proposed Edwards as a model for wholistic renewal of the churches, Iain Murray has written a substantial biography stressing the spiritual Edwards with whom academics( despite their fascination with Edwards 's mind) are sometimes uncomfortable, and John Piper, a Baptist pastor in the Twin Cities, has written powerful books that lean heavily on Edwards in arguing for a God-centered vision of existence( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ combination of renewed academic interest and renewed attention to Edwards 's theological vision has made it possible to reconsider his " old-world barbarism. " Such appreciation is especially appropriate for Two Dissertations, since this work turns out to be surprisingly expansive. Patient perusal of its pages is necessary, for despite the accelerating recognition of Edwards 's importance, his prose is still never going to be mistaken for that of Frederick Buechner. But what Edwards 's God-ordered picture of the universe offers is a tonic. One who might turn to Edwards, as H. Richard Niebuhr did in a previous generation, for insight concerning the Kingdom of God might remain for the byproducts. The Two Dissertations sketches a world in which it is possible to be reasonably confident about the fruits of empiricism. While our generation can never recover primitive naivete about our epistemological capacities, Edwards suggests that if we begin with confidence in God, we may have reasonable confidence that, when we look at something in nature or in society, we are doing more than looking @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ himself may not have practiced that virtue consistently. As a fine recent book on Edwards 's social views by Gerald McDermott points out, Edwards 's distaste for the Roman Catholic Church was so strong that he regularly thought he was witnessing its collapse when actually he was merely projecting his own ideological hopes onto the screen of contemporary events( One Holy and Happy Society, Penn State Press). But if Edwards did not practice perfectly what he preached, he still showed that a theocentric conception of the universe implied almost as much for the knowability of the universe as for the knowability of God. Edwards 's theocentric vision also turns out to contain a surprisingly high view of humanity. The generation of Oliver Wendell Holmes abandoned Edwards 's vision of Cod because it felt he demeaned humanity, but some intellectual successors to Holmes came to the conclusion( as in the later works of Twain) that maybe humanity was not so special either. Edwards, by contrast, believes that humanity is valuable, and that humans may even @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ own glory values and loves human beings. In his phrase, " ' t is easy to conceive how God should seek the good of the creature, consisting in the creature 's knowledge and holiness, and even his happiness, from a supreme regard to himself ; as his happiness arises from that which is an image and participation of God 's own beauty. " Since human " being " is the highest creation of the " Being of all being, " God values humanity because he values himself. Humanity turns out for Edwards to be a thing of nearly infinite value, because its purpose is to participate in the glory of the infinitely valuable Being. THE VIRTUES of Edwards 's work notwithstanding, even his most respectful readers have sometimes felt overwhelmed by the intense theocentricity of the Two Dissertations and similar works. Two of Edwards 's most ardent admirers in the 19th century were Scots who made the sort of indirect criticism that others who delight in Edwards 's works may also sometimes feel. Thomas Chalmers was probably @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ quarter century before 1850. He read Edwards with great delight from the time of his youth in the 1790s. As an old man Chalmers reported that after first reading Edwards he had " spent nearly a twelve-month in a sort of mental elysium, and the one idea which ministered to my soul all its rapture was the magnificence of the Godhead, and the universal subordination of all things to the one great purpose for which He evolved and was supporting creation. " But Chalmers also added a gentle rebuke, " I should like to be so inspired over again, but with such a view of the Deity as coalesced and was in harmony with the doctrine of the New Testament. " At the end of the 19th century, one of Chalmer 's successors, James Orr, after praising Edwards highly for his exalted vision of God, paused to note in Edwards " a certain strain... as if he were bent on disciplining himself to live at a height of religious emotion which it does not lie @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ If Chalmers and Orr, as Edwards 's friendly critics, were correct that Edwards overreached even himself in the effort to depict the glories of God, their testimony to Edwards 's beneficial influence is no less impressive. In all of Edwards 's great corpus, the Two Dissertations is perhaps the best place to encounter both the breathtaking vision of divine glory and the human strain required to take in that vision. For most of us, who so rarely strain in that direction while we eagerly seek the contemplation of ourselves, the defects of the Two Dissertations are not nearly as important as the merits, above all of which is the clear-eyed proclamation that we exist for God rather than God for us. Mark Noll recently wrote A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada( Eerdmans). This is the seventh in a series of articles " rethinking religious classics. " <p> 
