2027841 ESTONIA IS NOT likely to flash immediately to mind when one thinks of Eastern Orthodox homelands. But the little Baltic republic has become the chosen battleground in a canonicaland political-struggle between the two most influential sees in the Orthodox world. On February 23, Patriarch Aleksy II of Moscow formally broke communion with Patriarch Bartholomeos of Constantinople when he refused to include the name of the ecumenical patriarch in the usual commemorations( diptyches) during the Divine Liturgy. That simple omission set into motion a chain reaction of ecclesiastical explosions that threatened a meltdown of world Orthodoxy, which encompasses some 250 million faithful in 15 " autocephalous " or self-governing ancient patriarchates and national churches. But cooler mitered heads prevailed, and the rift proved to be short-lived. In a May 16 press release, the Ecumenical Patriarchate made a stunning announcement : " The Ecumenical and Moscow Patriarchates, in their wish to maintain Orthodox unity and to solve expeditiously the problems which have arisen lately regarding the Orthodox Church of Estonia, have agreed to allow, with extreme dispensation, the Orthodox of Estonia the freedom to choose which @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of Moscow, they wish to belong to. " This was obviously welcome news to everyone who desires harmony among Christians, Orthodox or otherwise. However, that first flush of relief may give way to a sense of foreboding among those who reflect on the terms of the " expeditious " compromise and what it reveals about the political modus operandi of the two patriarchs. Pitted against one another are two very energetic, dynamic, self-confident and forceful bishops. Each one is rather young by Orthodox standards for heads of significant sees( Bartholomeos is 56 and Aleksy 67), and each seems determined to carry the banner of a particular intraOrthodox cause that the other-as well as many Orthodox caught in the middle of this struggle-deems spiritually dangerous or at least an annoying distraction from the church 's collective mission. Patriarch Bartholomeos jealously guards the prerogatives of the bishopric of " New Rome " -that is, Constantinople, capital of the ancient Byzantine " East Roman " Empire and second in religious and political dignity only to Old Rome. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ among equals, " among all the Orthodox bishops throughout the world.( From the Orthodox perspective, the pope of " Old Rome " lapsed into heresy by the 11th century.) Yet some have questioned whether the emphasis rests more on primus than pares. Bartholomeos 's formation at the Pontifical Oriental Institute in Rome, from which he received a doctorate in canon law ; his ruthless quashing of a nascent pan-Orthodox synod of bishops for North America that was gingerly proposed at an episcopal gathering in Ligonier, Pennsylvania, in December 1994 ; his imperious and imperial personal style and interventions in Estonia, the Ukrainian diaspora and Japan-all these have earned for Bartholomeos, whether fairly or accurately, the unhappy epithet " neo-papal. " PATRIARCH ALEKSY II, at the helm of the largest Orthodox Church, with 100 to 125 million members( minus 35 million if all three of the rival Ukrainian Orthodox communities are factored out), has not yet evoked the late medieval Slavonic myth of Moscow as " Third Rome " supplanting both Rome @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and historic Russian interests in Estonia, Ukraine, and the rest of the " near abroad " of the former Soviet Union may speak louder than words. He has emerged, by dint of his own will or merely by default, as the de facto defender of what some East Europeans perceive as a distinctive Slavic Orthodoxy, a more traditionalist, nationalist, some would even say reactionary expression of the same Orthodox ethos that, in its current Hellenic and Levantine incarnations, appears a bit more ecumenical and internationalist. Since Moscow and the Russian Church rank only sixth in the primatial order of Orthodox churches, Aleksy can not directly challenge the spiritual authority of his elder brother in Christ in Constantinople. Enter Estonia. The present role within Orthodoxy of the northernmost Baltic republic reminds me of a scene in A Man for All Seasons, the marvelous film about St. Thomas More 's valiant but doomed efforts to remain silent on the Act of Succession imposed on the English parliament by King Henry VIII. During More 's trial for @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ perjures himself and effectively sends More to the executioner 's block. More asks Rich which badge of office he is currently wearing. " Attorney General for Wales, " Rich responds. Whereupon More remarks wryly, " What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, but-for Wales? " Substitute Estonia for Wales and the two patriarchs for Rich and one has a better grasp of the debilitating nature of the ecclesial squabble that, at least for a season, rent the venerable Orthodox Church. The tiny Orthodox community in overwhelmingly Lutheran Estonia( 45,000 out of a total population of 1.5 million) is merely a crackerjack prize, a trinket in a much greater contest. For the moment it may be the frontline of battle, but in truth it is only a sideshow in a much greater war being waged over the soul of Ukraine and, ultimately, for primacy among the world 's Orthodox faithful, as well as for the privilege of leading Orthodoxy in tough ecumenical dialogues that lie ahead-with Rome, the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and maybe even the Protestant confessions. NOR SHOULD the secular political dimensions of the conflict be overlooked. Russians are about to vote in their second presidential election. Whether or not Boris Yeltsin wins a second term is not directly relevant to the role of the Moscow Patriarchate in the life of its people. What will matter is whether Yeltsin or Gennady Zyuganov or whoever wins the election charts an aggressive, neoimperialist or neo-Soviet foreign policy that seeks to reassemble the Humpty Dumpty of the old Soviet Union. If darker forces prevail, the symbiosis of church and nation and the strong historic ties between church and state-whether run by czars or commissars-may prove too beguiling for Patriarch Aleksy II to resist. Erstwhile collaborator with the Soviet Communists and born-again spokesman for Russian democracy and nationalism-a potentially volatile, if unfamiliar, mix-he could become emboldened by having stood toe-to-toe with the ecumenical patriarch over Estonia and, once again, attach the coach of the church to the rebuilt engine of the Russian state. That would not bode well for the Ukrainian @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for the rest of world Orthodoxy-and the rest of the world, for that matter-who, despite the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the liberation of the Russian Orthodox Church from its obsequious devotion to the Soviet agenda at home and abroad, may suddenly be faced with an unwanted deja-vu experience. Conversely, if Patriarch Bartholomeos manages to transform a new foothold in Estonia into yet another sign of his global **29;929;TOOLONG already exercises primary jurisdiction over the Orthodox in Western Europe, North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Oceania and South Korea-there may be no stopping his ascendancy as " more equal " than his equals in the Orthodox episcopacy. He could decide to intervene forcefully in Ukraine, taking all three of the factious Ukrainian Orthodox jurisdictions under his wing in a direct rebuff to Moscow, which continues to maintain a large ecclesial beachhead there under the command of Metropolitan Volodymr of Kiev( or Kyiv in the preferred Ukrainian rendition). Thoroughly reinvigorated, Bartholomeos might attempt to settle longstanding theological differences with Pope John @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, without consulting the rest of the Orthodox bishops as traditional Orthodox conciliarism would demand. THOUGH APPARENTLY " resolved, " the dispute over the Orthodox minority in Estonia has exposed the dark side of contemporary Orthodox intraecclesial politics. The Estonian episode, however, is worth reviewing in detail for the incentive it may yet provide for Orthodox Christians in America( and perhaps in the " old countries " as well) to get their ecclesial act together. A chronicle of key events that neither patriarch would dispute includes the following entries : m Missionaries from Novgorod and Pskov( in present-day Russia) brought Orthodox Christianity to the territory of Estonia in the 12th century when all the lands of medieval Rus ' were still under the spiritual care of Constantinople. Local Constantinopolitan councils in 1590 and 1593 officially recognized the new Moscow Patriarchate and included in its canonical territory all the " Trans-Northern Lands, " which by 1721 included Estonia as part of the Russian Empire. * Bolshevik Russia, in the throes of a civil war, agreed to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ granted " autonomy "( but not independence) to the Orthodox Church in the new nation. * In response to an Estonian appeal in 1923 amid the ecclesial uncertainties in the Soviet Union( including Tikhon 's arrest and imprisonment), Patriarch Meletios IV of Constantinople created the Autonomous Estonian Apostolic Church as a diocese of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. * In 1944, for the second time during World War II, the Soviet army occupied Estonia and annexed it to the U.S.S.R. * A year later all the Orthodox communities in Estonia, both Russian- and Estonian-speaking, were reconstituted as a diocese of the Moscow Patriarchate. * A " Synod of the Estonian Orthodox Church in Exile " assembled in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1947, under the last pre-Soviet bishop in Estonia, and appealed successfully to Constantinople for spiritual protection. * In 1978 the Ecumenical Patriarchate declared its 1923 action " inoperative " but retained spiritual jurisdiction over the Estonian expatriates. In August 1992, one year after Estonia gained political independence from the U.S.S.R., Patriarch Aleksy @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Church in 1920 by his predecessor St. Tikhon of Moscow. * A year later, in August 1993, the Estonian State Department of Religions registered the Stockholm synod as sole legal successor to the Autonomous Estonian Apostolic Church with the presumed right of ownership to all church-related immovable property in Estonia. Each citizen was assured freedom of choice between the two rival Orthodox entities, but, since control over its property was now jeopardized, the Russian Orthodox Church filed a lawsuit to defend its legal and canonical standing in Estonia. * Within a year, representatives of 54 of the 83 Orthodox parishes-to be sure, a minority of the Orthodox population, most of whom are ethnic Russians concentrated in the country 's large urban congregations-petitioned the Ecumenical Patriarchate for formal acceptance as a diocese. * By late February 1996, it was clear to both Constantinople and Moscow that bilateral negotiations conducted for nearly two years had failed to resolve the Estonian question. The Ecumenical Patriarchate announced on February 20 that it had revived the dormant 1923 decision and resumed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ appointing Archbishop John of Helsinki, Finland, as its temporary administrator. Three days later, Patriarch Aleksy II announced that the Russian Orthodox Church had severed communion with the Orthodox churches of Constantinople and Finland. * By May 16, after monthlong negotiations, both patriarchates reached a compromise whereby 1) the Ecumenical Patriarchate temporarily suspended its February 20, 1996, decision for four months ; 2) each Orthodox parish is free to align with either Constantinople or Moscow during the interim ; and 3) the Moscow Patriarchate restored full communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate. In light of the intensity of the disagreement between the two parties, these items alone form an amazing set of undisputed facts. But each side brought to this mutual historical understanding its own peculiar concerns, interpretations and political agendas. And the exchange of views was hardly uplifting or fraternal. Patriarch Aleksy II and his Holy Synod in Moscow viewed themselves throughout the conflict as the aggrieved party in a power grab by the new Estonian government, on one hand, and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, between the pincers of church and state forces hostile to ethnic Russians. In its February 23, 1996, press release, for example, the Moscow Patriarchate accused the Estonian government of supporting a " schismatic group of priests and believers " in a cynical attempt to " to force the Russian-speaking faithful out of the country " and " to weaken and divide Orthodoxy. " Aleksy et al. also decried Constantinople 's " one-sided move " in accordance with the Estonian authorities as " a gross violation of all basic canonical rules existing in the Orthodox world by invasion into the territory of another local Orthodox Church. " The crux of the Muscovite argument was really quite simple : Estonia has from time immemorial been a part of the Russian Orthodox orbit, and a majority of the Orthodox faithful in the Baltic republic are and always have been of Russian ancestry. The confusion wrought by the October Revolution did not change these essential historical and ethnic connections. The Estonian Church 's autonomy under the jurisdiction of Constantinople beginning in 1923 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the Russian Orthodox Church and the Soviet regime 's disruption of the usual channels of communication between church hierarchies in Moscow, Tallinn( Estonia 's capital) and Constantinople. When Estonia was reincorporated into the Soviet Union and the Orthodox Church in Estonia was likewise restored to the jurisdiction of Moscow, this " reunification was welcomed by all the parishes of the Estonian Orthodox Church. " The Ecumenical Patriarchate 's 1978 declaration that rendered its 1923 decision " inoperative " and formally recognized the jurisdiction of Moscow in Estonia proper is still binding upon Constantinople and ought not to have been abrogated unilaterally. Such was Moscow 's reading of the situation. THE ECUMENICAL Patriarchate endeavored, for the most part, to play down the controversy, but it, too, resorted to hyperbole and acrimonious accusations. Insisting that nothing in the whole affair warranted a break in communion that would prove enervating for world Orthodoxy, Patriarch Bartholomeos and his Holy Synod refused to reciprocate Moscow 's excommunication. But Bartholomeos et al. defended their " reactivation " of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the Estonian Orthodox Church in a Patriarchal and Synodical Act issued on February 20, 1996. Since, the act declared, canons 9 and 17 of the Fourth Ecumenical Council( which met in Chalcedon in A.D. 451) accorded to the see in the imperial capital of Constantinople the role of mediator in ecclesiastical disputes within or between other dioceses, the " Most Holy Mother Church of Constantinople " had no choice but to respond as a tender mother to the " free and unanimous request " of one of her daughter peoples in East Europe in July 1923 to be received under her spiritual supervision. The autonomous Church of Estonia, however, was " violently destroyed " in 1944 and " made subject to the Church of Russia " for political reasons. But the Ecumenical Patriarchate refused to accept this fait accompli and always regarded the Estonian Orthodox Church in exile as the canonical successor to the oppressed church in the homeland. The Ecumenical Patriarchate 's 1978 decision was merely a temporary, fraternal concession to the Church of Russia then @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, in any case, be enforced in Estonia as long as it was part of the Soviet Union. But the liberation of Estonia in 1991 had so changed the political and national landscape that it was time for the Orthodox Church in Estonia to be restored through " reactivation " of the 1923 decision. A Russian-speaking bishop administering " an integral unit " within the Estonian Orthodox Church would ensure the " unhindered " continuity of the distinctive dimensions of the Russian Orthodox experience. Such was Constantinople 's rationale. Bartholomeos 's case against the Moscow Patriarchate 's role in Estonia was, like Aleksy 's against him, chock full of ad hominem attacks and charges of political machinations. In a vituperative letter to Aleksy dated February 24, 1996, the ecumenical patriarch accused his " dear brother in Christ God and concelebrant " of " using the negotiations as a pretext to secure an indefinite extension thus greatly damaging the sacred cause of Orthodoxy in Estonia. " The pro-Moscow faction of the Estonian Orthodox community currently headed by Archbishop Kornily was @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a Stalinist-imposed church structure that exploited the expulsion of Orthodox Estonians from their own homeland. The so-called autonomous Estonian Orthodox Church tied to Moscow was really a sham. " How can a church be called Estonian, " ' Bartholomeos asked, " when it is made up of Russian immigrants? " Further, Estonia was, for Bartholomeos, only the latest in a series of trespasses by the Moscow Patriarchate " in countries under the spiritual jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, namely, Estonia, Hungary, and elsewhere, always by the power of the Soviet Army. " Turning very personal, Bartholomeos reminded Aleksy-who earlier in his career had served as Moscow 's bishop in Tallinn for almost 30 years-that the Russian patriarch had been " born in Estonia under the omorphorion bishop 's stole of the Church of Constantinople and as her child you were baptized and spent your childhood there. " THESE WERE obviously uncharitable words for brothers in Christ to hurl at one another. As if that were not enough to dampen the spirits of Orthodox @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ joined-generally for the worse-by most of the autocephalous Orthodox churches and by many other prominent Orthodox leaders. Weighing in clearly on the side of Moscow were the patriarchs or senior metropolitans of the Orthodox churches of Antioch, Jerusalem, Serbia, Bulgaria and Poland. Metropolitan Dorotheus of Prague( Czech Republic) wrote to Patriarch Bartholomeos, suggesting, diplomatically to be sure, that the actions of the Ecumenical Patriarchate in Estonia might further delay the Great and Forthcoming Council of all the Orthodox churches, for which Orthodox have been preparing for a generation. Steering a more neutral course, the leaders of the Orthodox churches of Alexandria( Egypt), Georgia( in the Caucasus) and Cyprus expressed the hope that fraternal dialogue would settle the conflict as soon as possible. Metropolitan Theodosius and the Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church in America, notwithstanding their filial ties to the Moscow Patriarchate, also refrained from taking sides in the dispute( although Bishop Tikhon of San Francisco issued a sharp denunciation of Constantinople in one of his many online @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the heads of three undisputed autocephalous churches : Archbishop Anastasios of Tirana, Albania ; Archbishop Seraphim of Athens, Greece ; and Patriarch Teoctist of Bucharest, Romaniawho is still engaged in his own fouryear dispute with Patriarch Aleksy II over the Orthodox Church in the post-Soviet Republic of Moldova. Patriarch Bartholomeos and the Constantinopolitan position enjoyed unqualified public support only from a few Orthodox leaders who are controversial in their own right. " Patriarch " Filaret( Denysenko), disputed head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyivan Patriarchate( one of three rival claimants to episcopal primacy in Ukraine and former metropolitan of Kyiv under the Moscow Patriarchate) denounced Moscow 's refusal to commemorate the name of Bartholomeos as " an act of ecclesiastical schism. " Father Gleb Yakunin, the longtime human rights activist and critic of the Moscow Patriarchate 's collaboration with the Soviet Communists who was " defrocked " by Patriarch Aleksy II in 1993, ostensibly for running for re-election to a seat in the Russian parliament, pronounced Patriarch Bartholomeos " 100 percent right " on the Estonian question @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to the dissident Orthodox parishes in Ukraine and Russia. One bishop who distinguished himself in the whole nasty affair is Metropolitan Antony of Sourouzh, the Moscow Patriarchate 's own exarch in London, England. On the eve of Pascha( " Easter ") he appealed to his own patriarch to restore communion between the Russian Church and the Ecumenical Patriarchate. Although he accepts Moscow 's argument that Bartholomeos 's interventions in Estonia and in the Ukrainian community outside Ukraine are offensive to his fellow Russians, Antony observed that the break in communion, while hardly touching the faithful in Russia, has devastated the Orthodox in England, particularly the parish in Oxford, where Greek and Russian communities share a common buildin$. DOES THE May 16 compromise show the way out of this ecclesial quagmire? Despite the widespread acclaim that the announcement has drawn thus far, the deal-for that is truly what this agreement is-strikes me as an abdication of spiritual leadership by both patriarchs and a most unhappy precedent for world Orthodoxy. Both patriarchs have behaved more like @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Solomon in the classic Old Testament story. By settling, almost cynically, for half of the Estonian daughter church, Bartholomeos and Aleksy may have killed her Estonian Orthodox identity in its infancy, or at least plunged this nascent church into a fratricidal conflict that will be played out in congregation after congregation. In a Keston News Service story released just prior to the May 16 announcement, Lawrence A. Uzzell reported that clergy and laity already were maneuvering-sometimes quite dishonorably-for support of their preferred patriarchate, with mistrust on the rise among the Orthodox throughout the country. One may expect this situation to worsen in the next four months as each congregation plays the dangerous game of patriarchate by plebiscite. The compromise " solution " also imports the failed American model of Orthodox jurisdictional confusion. Since the 1920s in the aftermath of the October Revolution in Russia, Orthodoxy in America has become a crazy quilt of competing ethnic New World colonies with generally short tethers to the mother churches in the Old World. With as many as five bishops in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Orthodox have made a mockery of the ancient canonical principles of one bishop per city and integral territorial dioceses. Now, as the Orthodox in America struggle to find a way out of this ecclesial morass, the patriarchs of Constantinople and Moscow have seen fit to visit this confusion upon little Estonia. Not that either patriarch is enamored of the American experience. They are, on the contrary, merely perpetuating the Roman idea : better to divide the empire, as Diocletian did in A.D. 286, than to risk losing everything in a struggle for undoubted supremacy. IF THE LONG-TERM effects of the Estonian episode appear still more grievous than the temporary schism itself, it is still possible for world Orthodoxy to emerge from the whole affair stronger rather than weaker, and better equipped to witness to a spiritually troubled world on behalf of the ancient, unchanging, life-giving salvation in Christ Jesus that the Orthodox Church alone purports to provide in all its fullness. I suspect that St. Augustine of Hippo 's felicitous phrase " O felix culpa @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 's fault, grace abounds all the more. The Estonian episode may, ironically, serve as a platform for one or more exciting changes in ecclesial business-as-usual. First, a new model of Orthodox conciliarism may emerge. In a bitter editorial in the April issue of his diocesan magazine, Metropolitan Philip of the Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of New York and North America concluded that the Estonian crisis proves that " our system does not work. " How, he asked, can the ecumenical patriarch mediate disputes among autocephalous Orthodox churches when he himself is a party to such a dispute? Further, without a Byzantine emperor to preside over ecumenical councils the Orthodox no longer have a referee beyond the sacerdotium. Metropolitan Philip did, however, propose a positive solution. " Is it impossible, " he asked rhetorically, " to form a Pan-Orthodox Commission, representing all autocephalous churches, to mediate inter-Orthodox disputes? " This sounds like a no-brainer, but until the Estonian episode no bishop, to my knowledge, had made such @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ transcend the Roman idea altogether. Old Rome, New Rome, Third Rome : does the church in the modern world, with its third millennium looming only a few years away, really have to cling to any of these evocations of a bygone era and a dusty imperial image? What keeps the Ecumenical Patriarchate hanging on for dear life in the Phanar ghetto of Istanbul( still Constantinople to the Orthodox)? To do so, despite five long centuries of oppression by Turkish governments, manifests a profound, albeit increasingly desperate, loyalty to its once glorious Byzantine past. Shorn of its fragile tether to New Rome, especially if the Turks decide at last to flout world opinion and evict the Patriarchate from its borders, the Ecumenical Patriarchate fears for its standing as primus inter pares. The legendary claim to apostolicity through St. Andrew the Apostle notwithstanding, the Ecumenical Patriarchate derived its title from the seat of empire : Constantinople was the political and cultural capital of the oikoumene-the " inhabited world, " or, at least @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ no longer qualifies for this exalted title. SOME ORTHODOX visionaries have. suggested that the Ecumenical Patriarchate might relocate to Athens or to Geneva, headquarters of the World Council of Churches, but I would propose what is perhaps a more ingenious and less politically unappetizing alternative. Why not consider New York City, cultural crossroads of the late 20th century and headquarters of the United Nations? If Patriarch Bartholomeos moved his see to Manhattan and became " Archbishop of New York, Metropolitan of the Americas, and Ecumenical Patriarch, " he would solve three vexing problems at once : 1) he would immediately unite all the disparate Orthodox jurisdictions in North America into one 5-million-member church, the seventh-largest ecclesial organization in the U. S. and a formidable contender on the ecumenical scene ; 2) he would effectively set Western limits to the claims of the patriarch of the West( that is, the pope of Rome), insofar as all of the Western Hemisphere would fall under the spiritual care of the second see in Christendom( instead @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @) he would be free-without losing face-to relinquish spiritual care and supervision over Finland, Western Europe and, yes, Estonia. Bartholomeos would ultimately " lose " the battle over the Baltic republic, but he would " win " the war of the patriarchs for de facto primacy in world Orthodoxy. Finally, the unenlightening competition between two Old World patriarchs may convince the 5 million Orthodox Christians in the New World to cut the umbilical cords to their mother churches and to come of age ; to take their place collectively as a vibrant, hopeful daughter church alongside their haggard, downbeat mothers ; to become an energetic, evangelistic, genuinely prophetic counterpoint to the politics of convention, the ethnic parochialism and personal oneupmanship that appear inescapable in the venerable patriarchates in Europe. This language may sound typically American, the land of hubris one might expect from a convert to Orthodoxy. But my own hierarch, Bishop Nathaniel of the Romanian Orthodox Episcopate of the Orthodox Church in America, mused in print last September about what might have @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, Pennsylvania, in December 1994 had proclaimed " a land of ecclesiastic Boston( Ligonier) Tea Party " ' by cutting all canonical ties to the mother churches and forming a new " American Church. " There would have been a temporary estrangement, but " in time, the de facto " would become de lege. " ' But the bishops did not get radical, and the enthusiasm so evident in Ligonier seems in the last year and a half to have waned considerably. Until, that is, the Estonian episode reminded those of us in North America that all roads need not lead ultimately to Rome-Old, New or Third. Author Affiliation Alexander F. C. Webster is pastor of the Protection of the Holy Mother of God Orthodox Church in Falls Church, Virginia, and author of The Price of Prophecy : Orthodox Churches on Peace, Freedom, and Security( Eerdmans). // <p> 
