2024241 Enriched " Elder " The moving tribute to the Scripture scholar Raymond E. Brown, S.S.,( 8/29) was masterly. Its brevity, understandably, left some facets of Ray 's career unmentioned. I note only four from experience. 1) Ray was an effective preacher of the word-clear, insightful, pastoral. Witness his homilies at St. Mary 's Church in Baltimore, and at Corpus Christi Church near Union Theological Seminary in New York City. His addresses on how to preach using the liturgical cycle( Advent, for example) were priceless. 2) Ray was frequently harassed, picketed, calumniated by ultraconservative adversaries. Apropos of his treatment of the infancy narratives, one syndicated Catholic columnist asked if it was farfetched to suggest that Brown and his kind might be harboring " a death wish against the Child. " Still, never a harsh response, however deep the hurt. 3) Ray rarely if ever took something away from Catholics without putting something better in its place. One example : Dealing with Catholic fears of theological and catechetical disaster if we admitted @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ asked : Is it any more divine to say that Jesus instituted each sacrament than to hold that the church instituted at least some through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit? 4) Ray 's contributions, using New Testament evidence, to our deeper understanding of Catholic priesthood( priest as disciple, apostle, presbyter and presider at Eucharist) continue to enrich the lives of many of us " elders. " Walter J. Burghardt, S.J. Woodstock Theological Center Washington, D.C. Superb Scholar Thank you for honoring the late Father Raymond Brown on your cover and for the fine tribute to a superb biblical scholar by Daniel J. Harrington, S.J.( 8/29). I feel a personal loss in his death. In 1966, when, enthusiastic about implementing the directives of the Second Vatican Council, I embarked on establishing the Trinity College Biblical Institute in Burlington, I turned to Father Brown who was most helpful. Although he could not come as a lecturer that year, he immediately committed himself to our second institute in 1967. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and encouragement. His personal participation a half-dozen times enabled us to bring the best of biblical scholarship to the grass roots level, the very reason for the existence of our institute. Miriam Ward, R.S.M. Trinity College Burlington, Vt. Courage and Wisdom Kathleen A. Cahalan 's remembrance of Bernard Haring, C.Ss.R., " Still Spiritually Alive " "( 8/15) was a fine tribute to our departed confrere. How ironic that her eulogy found itself in an issue whose lead articles treat the evils of tobacco, since HIring himself had been a smoker and suffered from the resulting cancer of the throat-to the point of having lost his voice, but only literally until now. I wonder what my brother Redemptorist would think of the recent crackdown on bishops ' conferences( reported in the same issue). The gradual alienation of theologians from the conversation, any conversation, but especially from matters pastoral and moral, is akin to rendering the body of Christ blind or worse, voiceless. Who will pick up from where Haring @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ church which seems to be more interested in determining eligibility for true membership than in reaching out to the lost? Who will muster the courage and wisdom to keep teachers pastoral, to regard with awe the complexity of the human person, to remind us once again that our mission is not to moral perfectionism but rather to being free and faithful in Christ!? Daniel Francis, C.Ss.R. Redemptorist Missions Bronx, N. Y. Communal Responsibility The two articles by John McCain and Joseph Califano Jr.( 8/15) on the matter of tobacco manipulations hit the nail on the head as to who and what. The missing background that so silently abrogates positive actions on the tobacco issue and other equally deadly socially accepted ways to kill yourself is our society, which minimizes personal and communal responsibility and discipline, leaving all outcomes to whoever seeks gain for self. Raymond F. Zambito, D.D.S. Locust Valley, N. Y. Acrid Toxic Substance To live in south Georgia for several years is to become increasingly aware of living in a pandemic @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ concluding the tobacco harvest, after which they will move north to work in Kentucky. In reading Mr. Califano 's statistics, I wonder if the annual figure of 450,000 includes those who have worked directly in the cultivation and harvesting of this crop? For such an apparently benign plant, which matures to a nearly lime-green color and sprouts delicate pistils by early July, is acrid to the touch. We distribute brochures advising farm workers to wear long-sleeved shirts whenever they work with tobacco. When work begins at 4:00 A.M. to beat the heat that reaches 90 degrees by 9:00 A.M., these advisories are quickly forgotten, and clumps are grasped to the bare chest. The pesticides are particularly toxic during a summer of drought. We can count on taking farm workers with symptoms of nausea to the clinics during June and July. Two young people recently developed urinary tract infections, as their kidneys could not process the toxins accumulated in their bodies during the first few weeks of the harvest. Juana and Roberto needed medical attention because @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ liberally used with tobacco. What will become of their fathers, mothers, aunts and uncles, who have developed such a tolerance yet carry the toxins within? Marc Fallon, CS.C. Adel, Ga. Clean and Crisp I was pleased to see that you are moving into the age of computers. May I encourage you in this venture? I hope that you continue into the world of the Internet. Also, I wanted to compliment your use of Tim Foley 's art( cover, 8/15). It is clean, crisp and message-packed. Keep up the good work. Lantz Powell Louisville, Ky. Tender Feelings How is it possible that a Presbyterian 's reflections on the Assumption of Mary( 8/15), in the wink of an eye, could bond me to Mary-and, in a way, with more tender feelings for her than I experienced even back in the sweet days of the " May altar. " " Bring flowers of the rarest, bring flowers of the fairest " to Mary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to this poor human being, Mary. The Presbyterian and Mary have shown me this fascinating " new " face of the Creator! He is bedazzled by the prosaic. Vincent Blake, O.P. Albuquerque, N.M. Discretion and Balance Am I right in thinking that reflective Christians must be tired of having to read again and again and again that the church is( and ought to be) countercultural? Does such a one-sided position proceed from a thoughtful theology or from an ill-conceived ideology? St. Paul gives a far more balanced picture. He certainly does not spare his words about the " ungodliness and wickedness "( Rom. 1:18) that be found in the GrecoRoman culture ; yet he tells the Philippians that " whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just... you must consider "( Phil. 4:8). In truth, throughout its history the church has never embraced or rejected a culture in its totality but sought to exercise prudent judgement and to take what would blend well with the evangelical message @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ some of the church 's decisions turned out to have been misguided. Wisdom is in discretion, not in sweeping indictments. We believe( doctrine of the Catholic Church) that human nature is essentially good ; hence it will produce good fruits in any culture. We believe also that there are evil inclinations in human hearts( Catholic doctrine, too) ; hence cultures must be probed and pruned before they are received and sanctified in the earthly kingdom of God. Blessed be the teachers who teach us discretion! Besides, would not the church look silly without culture? Ladislas Orsy, S.J. Georgetown University Law Center Washington, D.C. LETTERS should be as brief as possible and sent with the writer 's name, address and daytime phone number to AMERICA 'S editorial offices or by electronic mail to : letters@americapress.org. Letters may be edited for length and clarity. <p> 
