4050441 October 's article on specifications for consumer electronics( some that might be ignored and some that are overhyped) drew lots of responses, with readers mentioning specs we should have added. Do you have your own issue with specs? Go to find. pcworld.com/61760 and click ' Comment '. The Specs That Matter... Not all megapixels are equal " The Specs That Matter( and the Specs That Do n't), " October. I have two digital cameras - a 4-megapixel Minolta and a 5.1-megapixel Fujifilm - and each of them comes with four different quality settings. The Minolta at its next-tohighest quality produces a much better picture than the Fujifilm at its highest quality, whether the pictures are on the computer or printed. In fact the Fujifilm camera is so bad, I think it 's junk. shanedr.from the PC World forums One spec often left out is FSB( frontside bus) speed, which indicates how fast the internal bus handles the other plug-in cards and memory. Hard-drive speeds are part of an overall spec that should include the drive 's type and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ important but often neglected, and seldom understood by anyone but a hard-core technician. mjd420nova, from the PC World forums Power-supply wattage is frequently overlooked. If you 're planning on buying a replacement graphics card, this information can be quite handy. JimH443, from the PC World forums For cameras, a very important spec is the delay between pressing the button and the actual taking of the photo. Film cameras( even el cheapos) have almost no lag. But for digital cameras( even some expensive ones), the lag can be almost half a second long, an eternity for candid or action shots. Another important attribute is how many pictures you can take in a short time. With film cameras, especially with autowind, you can take a whole roll( 36 shots) in a minute or less. You ca n't do that with most digital cameras, because the buffer gets filled. Such limitations are why I still use film cameras in many situations( even though I like digital ones) @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Security Suite Regarding " Build Your Own Free Security Suite " October, I could n't resist responding with my preferences. I currently use a mostly free suite : Alwil 's Avast Antivirus, Comodo Pro Firewall, PCTools ' Threatfire, and Tor( the last for when I want to protect my IP address when surfing the Web). In addition, I use two paid applications where I can not find free ones that I believe to be comparable : PCTools ' Spyware Doctor for malware protection and HistoryKill for cleaning/protection duty. These apps run smoothly and harmoniously on both my machines( one XP, one Vista), and have caught many nasties trying to enter my systems( Avast seems to net the lion 's share). Joel Barton, Grove City, Ohio Some high-speed Internet service providers have a free security suite that subscribers can download. Both Comcast and Cox, for example, offer McAfee 's Security Suite for up to three PCs. So before building your own free security suite, check your ISP @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ available there. Terry Pyle, Mesa, Arizona Hack Your Hardware Overall, I liked October 's " Hack Your Hardware, " but the part about overclocking your CPU could be a little misleading. A common misconception is that an OEM heat sink and fan will handle overclocking, and that the BIOS will protect your system. Please do n't make this mistake. It may very well cost you a motherboard, CPU, or memory module. If you want to overclock your PC or laptop, then install a thermal monitoring/management program, a very efficient CPU heat sink and fan, and an extra case fan to exhaust the heat generated by the increased speed of the CPU, frontside bus, and memory. Thermal management is critical for a PC of any size and configuration - heat is the number one enemy of a system. The PC World Downloads section has many free downloads for thermal management - take advantage of them. Dogbreath077, from the PC World forums By far the section I most appreciated was the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ forward. I 've been living for years with only a back-skip, which was a nuisance. That tip was worth a year 's subscription! Steven Friday, Little Rock, Arkansas I have just followed your instruction, reprogramming my Comcast DVR remote to add the 30-second jump. This is a boon ; my Motorola TV, unlike the TiVo, did n't have the feature, and I have been using the awkward fast-forward to skip commercials. Jumping forward in 30-second intervals, however, sometimes skips past the end of an ad, removing part of the desirable programming. Ronald W. Keil, Corvallis, Oregon Gas Crisis, Online Offers There was a movie once, about the conspiracies that the oil companies supposedly maintain to keep people buying gasoline " Gas Crisis Fuels Dubious Online Offers, " Forward, October. The fact is, such conspiracies do n't exist, or the companies never would have allowed the current hybrid cars. Ford would love to produce a waterpowered car ; they could charge a million bucks per @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ MythBusters TV program tested these ways to " improve fuel efficiency. " They really are bogus. gothicle, from the PC World forums Sweet Deal or Moral Lapse? The section " Is This Code for Me? " in " Insider Deals : Sweet, If You Can Score Them, " Consumcr Watch, October blatantly approves an immoral act immoral because no one has the right( for their own or anyone else 's benefit) to redefine the domain of coupon redeemers or coupon eligibility. A comparable situation might be traffic laws. Each law( coupon) has as its intent a certain set of drivers( highway, off-road, and so on). Highway drivers can not apply the rules meant for off-road drivers( the coupons) to the highway to gain a benefit, such as no speed limits. For retail sellers to subvert the intent of coupon issuers by not enforcing the issuers ' intent is a moral lapse. Rodger A. Sanders, McMinnville, Tennessee Spam Kings With regard to the article " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ find. pcworld.com/61825 : The spamming activities of these so-called kings have often been a symptom of larger, more disturbing sociopathic tendencies. To take a phrase from Yoda, " spam does not make one great. " These people are antisocial to begin with, so they do n't particularly care how hated and reviled they quickly become - and they seem to enjoy the notoriety that they achieve, embodied in that " spam king " title. Why do you reward these people? jdfalk, from the PC World forums PC World welcomes your feedback. We reserve the right to edit for length and clarity. Share your thoughts in the Comments area under each story on our Web site, or visit our Forums( forums. pcworld.com). Send e-mail to letters@pcworld.com. 
