2015341 // Pretend you are living 1,200 years ago in ancient Greece. You spent the day playing in the ocean. When you came home, the servant fixed a tasty meal of boiled seal and seaweed. Now it 's time to brush your teeth and go to bed. Do you reach for the toothbrush and the Colgate? No way. This is 1,200 years ago, remember? You reach for the wool rag and the powdered mouse bones. And if you 're out of mouse bones, you might open a new container of ashes -- from burnt rabbit fur!. That 's right. Our ancestors all over the world once used amazing mixtures and odd items to brush and clean their teeth. just listen to these crazy concoctions! To whiten their teeth, the ancient Greeks also used powdered crab eyes, snails, at droppings, and iron rust. Yum! Hindu priests in India once cleaned their teeth with slivers of cherry wood. Ancient Arabs would carve sticks from a special shrub. This shrub contained much sodium bicarbonate, a natural cleanser. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in many popular toothpastes. It 's hard to believe that people have been cleaning their teeth with sodium-bicarbonate for 5,000 years! Those old tooth-care products certainly were interesting-but they did n't work very well. Toothaches and cavities were very common. Egyptian doctors believed that olive oil, dates, onions, and honey cured all types of mouth problems and toothaches. Many people used peppermint oil to relieve a toothache. Ancient Chinese people tried to stop the pain by inserting a live louse into the cavity.( Loused by is the singular of lice.) Some believed that cavities were caused by worms nibbling at the inside of the tooth. To fix the problem, they just yanked out the offending tooth!. It was n't until 1728 that people believed otherwise. Pierre Fouchard proved that there were no squiggly creatures living in our pearly-whites. He is considered the father of modern dentistry. // Different herbs and spices kept our ancestors ' breath sweet-smelling. Cardamom seed, anise seed, nutmeg, and mint leaves have all @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Tooth care has come a long way. In America today, it begins as soon as kids have teeth. But toothpaste ingredients still have weird names : stannous fluoride, calcium pyrophosphate, and magnesium aluminum silicate. You would think that the war against tooth decay would be over by now! But listen to this : More than half the people now living in America will lose all their teeth by age sixty-five. So do n't mess around-it 's time to brush! And the next time you pick up your tube of minty-fresh gel toothpaste, think about your ancestors. Crab eyes, burnt rabbit fur,. powdered coral, bat droppings... You know something? Compared to that, brushing after every meal does n't sound bad at all! <p> 
