4050141 JEAN VANIER, the founder of L'Arche, an international network of communities of care for the disabled, writes that " communities which start by serving the poor must gradually discover the gifts that those poor people bring. " In the end, the most important thing is not to do things for people who are poor and in distress, but to help them to have confidence in themselves Some communities grow by listening to their members ' needs for formation and wellbeing. This growth is usually material : the communities go for the best and most comfortable buildings, where everyone has their own room. These communities will die fairly quickly. Other communities will grow by listening to the cry of the poor. Most of the time, this leads them to become poorer themselves, so that they can be closer to poor people. What might that mean? I do not want to become poorer. I want to remain the academic who can pretend to defend those with mental disability by being more articulate than those I am criticizing. In short, I do not want @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a warrior on behalf of L ' Arche, doing battle against the politics that threaten to destroy these gentle communities. Vanier, of course, is no less a warrior. But where I see an enemy to be defeated, he sees a wound that needs to be healed. According to Vanier, we all carry a deep wound - the wound of our loneliness. That is why we find it hard to be alone and we try to heal our aloneness by joining a community. But to belong for the sake of belonging can only lead to disappointment. We must realize, as Vanier says, that " this wound is inherent in the human condition and that what we have to do is walk with it instead of fleeing from it. We can not accept it until we discover that we are loved by God just as we are, and that the Holy Spirit, in a mysterious way, is living at the center of the wound. " This is the radical insight at the heart of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ wounded people who are loved by God, gentleness is not possible. The stories Vanier tells of the disabled are often stories of loneliness not easily overcome. For example, he tells the story of Daniel, whose disabilities were so severe that his parents did not want him. After being put in one institution after another, Daniel ended up in a psychiatric hospital. Even at L ' Arche Daniel would now and again flip out of reality, " hiding his anguish and himself behind hallucinations. He had constructed thick walls around his heart that prevented him from being who he was. He felt guilty for existing, because nobody wanted him as he was. " Vanier notes that the heart of a child is easily hurt, and the hurt becomes a wound around which we build walls of protection. Walls so constructed can be breached only by gentleness. What does this have to do with politics? I think the gentleness of L Arche helps us see why liberal political theory has found it difficult to provide @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ say " liberal political theory, " I 'm not talking about the ideas behind the platform of the Democratic Party. I am referring instead to the political philosophy that both liberals and conservatives in America assume. According to Dutch ethicist Hans Reinders, at the heart of our political arrangements is the assumption that " individuals are free to live their own lives as they prefer, provided that they allow other people equal freedom to do the same, and provided that they accept and receive a fair share of the burden and benefits of the social cooperation. " My way of putting this more colloquially is to say that we live in a time when people believe they have no story except the story they chose when they thought they had no story. That 's " freedom " in a society shaped by liberal political theory. If you do n't believe that 's true, just ask yourself whether you believe that someone should be held responsible for a decision they made when they did n't know what they were doing. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is deep in our souls. We believe that we should be held responsible only for the things we freely chose when we knew what we were doing. The problem with this way of thinking is that it makes marriage unintelligible. How do we ever know what we are doing when we promise lifelong monogamous fidelity? Christians are required to marry before witnesses in church so we can hold them to the promises they made when they did n't know what they were doing. If marriage renders this understanding of freedom unintelligible, try having children. You never get the ones you wanted. Yet we still feel extraordinary pressure to raise our children in such a way that they will not have to suffer for our convictions. Otherwise, we think they would not be " free. " But this just reveals that we do not know why we 're having children. And this has everything to do with the deep assumptions about freedom that shape our lives. We believe that we should produce people who have no story except @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ So our children grow up thinking that freedom is the choice between a Sony and a Panasonic. The myth of freedom described above is the story we tell ourselves to hide the fact that we are not, indeed, our own creatures. Some of the work being done in political philosophy supports my point here. In the latter half of the past century, no political philosopher was more influential than John Rawls, who wrote A Theory of Justice. Martha Nussbaum, one of Amelica 's most prominent public intellectuals, is an heir of Rawls. According to Nussbaum, the attempt to secure mutual advantage for social cooperation on the basis of mutual advantage for the contracting parties is at the heart of liberal political theory. A " strong rationalism " informs the liberal project in the hope that an account of political life can be justified that avoids appeals to intuitions and prejudices. One of the aspects of liberal political theory is an attempt to avoid contingency. We try to give an argument that is true without appealing @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ us to provide an account of justice that does not depend on the presumption of altruism, but rather assumes an admittedly fictive bargaining process that establishes fundamental principles of mutual advantage. The presumption is that people will do the right thing if they can see that it really is in their best interest. Nussbaum does not call into question these presuppositions of the liberal political project. Yet she acknowledges that this understanding of justice has omitted people of disability from consideration. Nussbaum is struggling with this ambiguous position of our society : at the same time we say we want to take care of the disabled, we also want to eliminate them. It would seem that all that Rawls and other like-minded lib- eral theorists need do to respond to Nussbaum 's concern for the disabled is to acknowledge that some provision needs to be made for such people when they come to the bargaining table to negotiate their self-interest. You might say we can have a fair game if we just level the playing field at the start. But Rawls @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ because if he did so " he would lose a simple and straightfor- ward way of measuring who is the least well-off in society, a determination that he needs to make for the purpose of thinking about material distribution and redistribution, and which he makes with reference to income and wealth alone. " So Nussbaum thinks that rather than focusing on income and wealth we have to learn to ask, " What is each person capa- ble of doing? " According to Nussbaum, to focus on capabilities means that we are fundamentally bodily beings whose ration- ality is but one aspect of our animality. Therefore our " bodily need, including our need for care, is a feature of our rationality and our sociability. " To focus on capabilities means that the variation of needs can be respected. This makes it possible to ask why children need more protein than adults or, more generally, why some need more care than others and why that care must be individualized. Nussbaum thinks, moreover, that such care is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ can not help being sympathetic with Nussbaum 's attempt to acknowledge the needs of the disabled. But it is not clear that the concept of capabilities advances justice. The very notion of capabilities depends on close analysis of practices that allow us to correlate the needs of a particular person with what will satisfy those needs. But that kind of concreteness is not available as long as Nussbaum is determined to maintain Rawls 's liberal framework. It 's the same problem all over again : when we try to imagine politics without the contingencies of human life, people with disabilities get in the way. The Oxford philosopher Alan Ryan rightly observes that it is not as if Nussbaum fails to be persuasive about the needs and capacities of the disabled. The problem, he thinks, is that it is not clear why our- and by " our " I assume he means those of us who are not disabled- relation to the disabled is a matter of injustice. What, Ryan asks, would be lost by saying that the duties @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ duties of justice? Nussbaum shows- over and over- that no theory that explains justice as a contract for mutual advantage will show that these duties toward the disabled are a matter of justice. There may be little mutual advantage for the person who helps a particular child. Do we need a different theory of justice or should we say that many duties are grounded directly in the needs of beings to whom duties are owed, but are not a matter of justice? What difference does it make which we say?( New York Review of Books, June 22, 2006). Nussbaum might well say in response that it makes all the difference what we say because if we do not understand what is done in the care of disabled children, we may abandon them to a world that can not be trusted to care for them. The problem with Nussbaum 's attempt to provide a theory to ensure that the disabled are cared for is that it is just that- a theory. It is a theory, moreover @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ so that we might be protected from one another and the disabled. In contrast, Reinders argues that there is no point in arguing with a skeptical spectator that he or she should care about the disabled. Instead, he says, it is crucial for a liberal society that people exist who are willing to engage in the practice of caring for the disabled. According to Reinders, no public policy or theory can resolve the problem of what appears to be the burden of the lives of the disabled unless " it can tap resources that motivate citizens to value the commitment that it requires. " After all, significance found in sharing one 's life with another person- a significance that will usually come as a surprisecannot be found outside the activity itself. In an early essay on the history of L'Arche, Vanier wrote : We began living together, buying food, cooking, cleaning, working in the garden, etc. I knew really nothing about the needs of handicapped people. All I wanted to do was @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ did have a tendency to tell them what to do ; I organized and planned the day without asking their opinion or desire. I suppose this was necessary in some ways, for we did not know each other and they came from a very structured situation. But I had a lot to learn about listening to the needs of handicapped people ; I had a lot to discover about their capacity to grow. This is where political theory hits the ground. Nussbaum wants to give Vanier justifications for helping the disabled. What she ca n't do is give him a reason to live with them. But that 's exactly what Vanier says he needed. He had to be taught how to be gentle. It is not easy to learn to be gentle with the mentally disabled. They also suffer from the wound of loneliness. They can ask for too much. Which means gentleness requires the slow and patient work necessary to create trust. Crucial for the development of trust is that assistants in L'Arche discover the darkness @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Remember, all assistants come to L ' Arche already shaped by the political assumptions I 've described. According to Vanier, through the struggle to discover that we are wounded like the mentally disabled, we discover how much " we need Jesus and his Paraclete. For without them we can not enter into this life of compassion and communion with our weaker brothers and sisters. " In case anyone wonders if Vanier recognizes the political implications of what he has learned, he tells us that through his contact with men and women with intellectual disabilities, I discovered then how divided and fragmented our societies are. On the one hand are those who are healthy and well integrated into society ; on the other are those who are excluded, on its margins. As in Aristotle 's day, there are still masters and slaves. I realized that peace could not prevail while no attempt was made to span the gulf separating different cultures, different religions, and even different individuals. That is why I am bold to suggest @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of L'Arche are not peculiar to L'Arche, but rather necessary for any polity that would be about the goods held in common. For gentleness requires, as Reinders observes, that we learn to see that the other person is " given " to us in the sense that, prior to rules and principles of social morality, the presence of the other in our lives constitutes our responsibility. Moral responsibility arises neither from contractual relationships nor from the cooperative exchange between independent individuals. Instead it arises from the nature of the moral self that discovers itself within a network of social relationships..... The benefits bestowed by love and friendship are consequential rather than conditional, which explains why human life that is constituted by these relationships is appropriately experienced as a gift. A society that accepts responsibility for dependent others such as the mentally disabled will do so because there are sufficient people who accept something like this account as true. Long story short : we do n't get to make our lives up. We get to receive our lives @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ no story except the story we chose when we had no story is a lie. To be human is to learn that we do n't get to make up our lives, because we 're creatures. Christians are people who recognize that we have a Father whom we can thank for our existence. Christian discipleship is about learning to receive our life as gift without regret. And that has the deepest political implications. Much of modern political theory and practice is about creating a society in which we do not have to acknowledge that our life is a gift we receive from one another. 
