2024741 It 's four in the morning and I 'm fighting to stay awake. I hope some more hot tea and cookies will help recharge my system sufficiently so I can choose which star gets the honor of the last exposure. This is my third and final night on the Mayall 4-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, outside Tucson, Arizona, and so far it has been the clearest night of the three. I think I 'll finally get some good spectra for our white dwarf study. This observing project is a collaboration among Caty Pilachowski of Kitt Peak National Observatory, Bob Milkey of the Space Telescope Science Institute, and me. Caty and Bob are attending astronomical meetings elsewhere, so one of my contributions to the project is making the observations. Although I 'm observing in November, our project got started the previous February when we submitted a proposal to the telescope allocation committee requesting three nights on the 4-meter telescope. We need its light-gathering power to observe our faint white dwarfs. And the 4-meter has a special spectrometer that enables us to measure accurately white dwarf @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ all three nights. I felt quite lucky because most telescopes on Kitt Peak are oversubscribed. For the August 1991 to February 1992 observing semester, only 49 out of 111 proposals were granted time on the 4-meter, so some astronomers will have to reapply next year when their objects are again visible. The stars we are interested in are called DA white dwarfs. Roughly two-thirds of white dwarfs are of type DA. When the Sun finally uses up its nuclear fuel, it most likely will end its life as this type of white dwarf. The D signifies that the spectrum comes from a degenerate star.( The pressure created by electrons in a special state called degeneracy prevents white dwarfs from collapsing.) The A refers to the fact that only hydrogen lines are visible in the star 's spectrum. These stars typically range in temperature from 10,000 to 50,000 kelvins, in mass from 0.2 to 0.9 solar mass, and in radius from 6,000 to 15,000 kilometers. So these stars are hotter than the Sun( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Specifically, our project is to measure how quickly these white dwarfs rotate. During the run, we hope to obtain accurate rotation rates for a few more white dwarfs. We also want to observe several white dwarfs again because their rotation rates are uncertain. We measure the rotation rate of a white dwarf by analyzing the shape of the red hydrogen-alpha line in the star 's spectrum. Preferably, we would like to use more than one line, but DA white dwarfs produce few lines in their spectra( see spectra on page 41).( Spectra omitted). Rotation makes spectral lines broader. By measuring how broad a star 's spectral lines are, we can tell how fast the star rotates. A star like the Sun is considered a slow rotator because it rotates only once every 25 days. But the Sun 's rotation rate will become even slower when the Sun runs out of nuclear fuel in its core and expands into a red giant star. Like a figure skater who extends the arms to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ as a red giant. But this is n't the final step in the Sun 's aging process. After the red giant phase, it will become a white dwarf. To become a white dwarf, the Sun must shrink to about the size of Earth. As it shrinks, it will start spinning faster, like the spinning figure skater pulling in the arms. White dwarfs, from this line of reasoning, should rotate once or twice every minute. However, researchers have found that white dwarfs rotate at a much slower rate -- about twice per hour. Why these stars rotate so slowly still puzzles astronomers. If all of the observations from this observing run turn out okay, we 'll have spectra for ten stars. Taking spectra of faint white dwarfs is a slow process, even on a 4-meter telescope. In order to measure the spectrum accurately, we must observe each star for two or three hours. The hardest part is staying awake because everything is computer controlled. Unlike the " good old @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ cage to guide the star image along the entrance to the spectrometer, we now sit in a warm console room. Computers slew the telescope to the next object, move the dome to follow the telescope, control the CCD camera on the spectrometer, and display the CCD image. Automatic guiders relieve the astronomer of the tedium of guiding the telescope for several hours. Since computers now do most of the work, the time astronomers used to spend guiding and moving the telescope and dome is now free. On previous observing runs, I tried to read professional journals, but I found the journals to be more powerful than sleeping pills at 2 a.m. Now I mostly read fiction. I actually reel a little extraneous with the computers doing most of the work and can see the day when astronomers will routinely " observe " from their home institutions through a computer link to the observatory. Even though the job is easier, the work day is still long. This morning I got to bed about 10 a.m. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ through my star list for the night 's objects. Before dinner at 5 p.m., I started the CCD calibration procedures because we do n't want to use valuable observing time on these camera exposures. A quick dinner -- or was it breakfast? -- and I was back at the telescope as the Sun set. Astronomers do n't get to move the telescope. Large telescope operators( LTOs) are assigned to assist astronomers on the large scopes at Kitt Peak. They decide if the telescope should be closed because of the weather and they move the telescope and dome for the observer. The LTOs also help with instrument and computer problems. They are an indispensable part of the observing team and often do n't get the recognition they deserve for making the observing run successful. Finally deciding on a white dwarf called EG46 as the last star to observe, I hand the star 's coordinates to Dave Chamberlin, my LTO this night. He types them into the telescope control computer and the 4-meter moves to the first @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ that the star arrives almost directly on the entrance aperture of the spectrometer. Dave sets the automatic guider and I start the exposure. I do n't have to make any adjustments to the spectrometer tanks to another key member of the observatory staff, Darryl Willmarth. Darryl was the support scientist assigned to help set up the instrument used during my run. He showed me how to use the spectrometer and the new computer system. These kind, helpful support scientists are often wakened by grumpy astronomers whose research is temporarily stymied by some problem. I 'm thankful I have n't had to call Darryl at all during this run since the instrument has worked smoothly. I wish I could say the same about the weather. The first night of our run was cloudy and windy. Jean Nowakowski was my LTO then and she kept a watchful eye on the weather. If the humidity gets too high or the wind speed creeps over 45 miles per hour, the telescope must be closed. The wind had been brisk and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ close. Fortunately, the wind kept below 35 miles per hour. The wind can play interesting tricks on you around the telescopes. Somehow the one door at the base of the 4-meter building always managed to rattle just after I walked by it. At least it was n't as eerie as the McMath solar telescope used to be before the wind screen was installed. When the wind blew across the top of the McMath, it was like air sounding an organ pipe. The telescope would moan and howl like a lost soul. Of course, the 4-meter has its own tricks. When the dome rotates, the floor trembles slightly as if a mild earthquake has struck the mountain. The telescope is mounted on a pier that is separate from the dome support, so it does n't feel the dome movement. But unsuspecting, dozing astronomers have sometimes been awakened by the tremor. The unstable atmospheric conditions that night also affected the seeing. Star images were over 4 arcseconds in diameter. This was disastrous for @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the spectrometer. The already faint white dwarfs appeared more than one magnitude fainter. Also, the humid air caused clouds to form directly overhead. We fought a grim duel with the clouds, opening and closing the dome, until the clouds dispersed after midnight. Jean 's job started at sunset when she first opened the dome to equalize the temperature of the air inside and outside the dome to optimize the seeing. Sunset was spectacular, thanks to the dust cloud from the Mount Pinatubo eruption. While we waited for the sky to get dark, we took some calibration frames for the CCD camera. Jean 's job did n't end at sunrise, because another astronomer, Ken Hinkle, came on duty to observe for a few hours after daybreak. Jean then helped Alex Macdonald, the LTO who assisted Ken, to rotate the cage at the front end of the telescope. The cage holds two secondary mirrors back-to-back. My program uses the Cassegrain secondary because the spectrometer is mounted at the back-end of the telescope @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ below the telescope, so the coude secondary must be used to focus light at his instrument. Ken is an infrared astronomer and was looking at IRC +10216, a carbon star that is obscured by a circumstellar shell. He aimed to find the relative abundance of hydrogen to carbon for this object. Astronomers need this ratio to estimate how much mass is lost each year by IRC +10216. Ken can observe during the day because Earth 's atmosphere is relatively dark in the infrared. Jean was again my LTO on the second night. The wind and poor seeing continued, so the spectra did not look very good. I worried greatly that the entire observing run would be a wasted effort. If we did n't get data from this run, it would be several years before we again were on the 4-meter. Sometime during the night, someone called with a report of a bright meteor that had streaked across the sky. Unfortunately, we were in a closed room and did n't see anything. Alex joined @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ morning of observing. Finally, on this last night of my run, the wind died down and the seeing got a little better. It 's not great at 2 arcseconds, but one gets more light into the spectrometer and better spectra. Observing went so much better that Dave worked through his normal midnight lunch time and I skipped lunch altogether. Although many large telescopes are being built on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, Kitt Peak still has the single largest collection of telescopes in the world, with new additions planned. The University of Wisconsin, Indiana University, Yale University, and the National Optical Astronomy Observatories( NOAO, Kitt Peak 's parent organization) have joined to build the 3.5-meter WIYN telescope at the site where a 0.9-meter telescope resided or many years( bottom left of photograph on page 38).( Photograph omitted). The National Radio Astronomy Observatory operates two telescopes on a ridge to the west of the Kitt Peak observatory site. Case Western Reserve runs a Schmidt camera on the mountain, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ those of Steward Observatory( 2.3 meters) and the Spacewatch program( 0.9 meter). McGraw-Hill Observatory, operated by the University of Michigan, MIT and Dartmouth College, has 1.3-and 2.4-meter telescopes. Another branch of NOAO, the National Solar Observatory, has its McMath and vacuum telescopes on the mountain. Although originally used almost exclusively for solar observations, the McMath also has an active laboratory spectroscopy program and a vigorous nighttime stellar observing program. Astronomers currently are exploring the feasibility of upgrading the McMath 's 1.5-meter optics to 4 meters. Larger mirrors would enhance solar observations in the infrared and the nighttime programs. Even the visitor center is being upgraded. Visitors may tour the observatory from 9 a.m. to 3:45 p.m. every day, except Thanksgiving Day, December 24 and 25, and New Year 's Day. Be aware that the observatory is at an altitude of nearly 7,000 feet and that you 'll need to walk a lot to tour the telescopes. Also note that the weather on the mountain may be considerably cooler @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the visitor center to admire the basketry of the Tohono O'odham Indians, who own the land upon which the observatory sits. Now it 's 6 a.m. and the end of my observing run. If this were a novel, I would be driving back to Tucson as the Sun rises. Instead, I still have several hours of work to do, copying our hard-won data to magnetic tape and making copies of the observing logbook. As the data flow silently onto the tape, I wonder whether the observing run has been a success. Unfortunately, we wo n't know until we analyze the data. But with any luck, we 'll have gained new knowledge about the rotation of white dwarfs -- and maybe, with an extra bit of luck, we 'll learn a little more about how stars evolve from giants into white dwarf. <p> 
