2103041 Ever since the Vietnam War, many military officers have contended that U.S. troops in combat face two foes : one on the battlefield, the other in the news media. In this view, reporters are more interested in probing for contradictions between official statements and the testimony of footsore grunts than in emphasizing any underlying unity of purpose. They seek out graphic images of suffering, invading the privacy of victims and allowing emotion to obscure larger concerns of national policy. Above all, they may be so skeptical about war in general, or a current war in particular, that they do not root for the American side. Journalists regard this characterization as unfair, but audiences may not be so sure. The U.S. public seemed unperturbed when the Pentagon hindered American reporters in covering the invasions of Grenada and Panama. As the likelihood of combat has risen in the Persian Gulf, where battlefield conditions and terrain would make military assistance a necessity for reporters, distrust between the brass and the press has blazed anew. Despite repeated contacts with news executives who believe they made their @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ rules for the behavior of journalists on any gulf battlefield from one page to six. Even after a promise of revision following a heated session with about 60 senior Washington journalists late last week, the Pentagon seems firm in its intention : to impose unprecedented restrictions on where reporters may go, whom they can talk to under what conditions, and what they can show of combat. Says ABC News Washington bureau chief George Watson : " Literally interpreted, the proposed rules say you could n't take a picture of a wounded soldier. It 's not possible to cover a war without showing casualties. " Initially the most attention-grabbing restriction was a Pentagon fitness test for reporters, involving sit-ups, push-ups and a 1.5-mile run. The idea was that before being certified for combat coverage, a journalist would have to demonstrate that he or she would not slow down troops. The test, never before attempted in any U.S. conflict, prompted much eyeball rolling and jollity in newsrooms across the nation. But in Saudi Arabia, where @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ correspondents passed and nearly all said the rule had practical value in a battle zone with blazing sun and few trees or buildings for cover. Los Angeles Times correspondent David Lamb, 50, who also reported from Vietnam between 1968 and 1970, described the fitness hurdle to his editors as " a blatant violation of my constitutional rights, but the correct thing to do " Some journalists asked whether civilian and military officials on inspection tours would face the same rule. Pentagon officials eventually conceded that they had gone overboard and withdrew the test, but said they would still expect correspondents to be fit enough to cope with the desert. 
