2005441 The Congressional Black Caucus recently completed its 27th Congressional Black Caucus Annual Legislative Conference( CBCALC) week in Washington, D.C., focusing on the issues of economic development, increased voting participation and enhanced political power set forth by Chair Maxine Waters. " In order to shape our discussions for the upcoming workshops, no matter what the topic, race is an underlying factor, " said Waters, who opened the conference with a Town Hall Meeting on race relations. One of the largest gatherings in the CBC 's history attended this year 's conference, which sponsored 53 issue braintrusts and forums. Hundreds were on hand to applaud as South Carolina Rep. James Clyburn, the CBCALC Honorary Chairman, also cited another of the four-day conference 's objectives : " We will develop the kind of leadership that can be successful for us as we approach the new millennium. " Photograph Congressional Black Caucus Chair Rep. Maxine Waters addresses conference. Photograph A President Bill Clinton and Rep. James Clyburn exhort attendees of the conference to prepare for the new millennium, citing the need for leadership and brotherhood @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ at the gala on the final evening of the conference, received a rousing ovation when he told the gathering, " As we approach the new millennium, we must decide that we can never be what we ought to be unless we get there together. " Clinton added, " We do n't have time for, or room for, discrimination. We 've got to embrace a future in which we 're all going forward together. " The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation( CBCF), chaired by Sony Music Entertainment Vice President LeBaron Taylor, headlined numerous outstanding speakers, among them Dr. John Hope Franklin, who was picked by President Clinton to lead the Advisory Council on Race Relations ; Dr. Cornell West, director of African-American Studies at Harvard University ; and Dr. Julia Hare, noted motivational speaker and author. Some of the topics at very well attended forums and braintrusts included : Empowering the Black community, Dialogue between Civil Rights Crusaders and the Hip-Hop Generation, Trade with Africa, Women and Business, Juvenile Justice @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and Health : AIDS. Photograph LeBaron Taylor, Sony Music Entertainment Inc. Vice President, chairs the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation which showcased prominent Blacks discussing a myriad of topics. Rep. Major Owens( r) is among the honorees at the awards ceremony. Photograph Among the attendees of the Legislative Conference are( l-r) U.S. Labor Secretary Alexis Herman and U.S. Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater ; Rep Ronald Dellums and Johnson Publishing Co. President and Chief Operating Officer Linda Johnson Rice. Photograph The late Betty Shabazz 's daughters accept the Chair 's award on her behalf Pictured with Vice President Al Gore are Shabazz 's daughters( l-r) Attallah, Malikah, Malaak, Gamilah, Illyasah. Photograph Recipients of awards( l-r) John Hope Franklin, Coretta Scott King and Myrlie EversWilliams are congratulated by CBCF Chairman LeBaron Taylor, Sr., CBC Chair Maxine Waters and Vice President Al Gore. // Highlighting the awards ceremony, which was attended by U.S. Vice President Al Gore, was the acceptance of the Chair 's Award by the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Shabazz, and her sisters, on behalf of their mother, the late Dr. Betty Shabazz. Myrlie EversWilliams and Coretta Scott King were also recipients of the Chair 's Award. Photograph Ms. Laura Murphy( far, l) receives the William L. Dawson Award from Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson ; Danny Bakewll, Sr. receives the George W. Collins Award from Congressman William Clay( l) ; and NAACP Chairwoman Myrlie Evers-Williams, recipient of the Chair 's award, is congratulated by Congresswoman Eva Clayton( r). Photograph Congressman Bennie Thompson( l) congratulates William Lucy, recipient of the Harold Washington Award ; William Brooks, retired Vice President of Corporate Affairs for General Motors, is honored with a Chairman 's Award ; and Jason Charles receives the Youth Community Service Award from CBCF Chair LeBaron Taylor( r). // Other distinguished award winners included Rep. Major Owens, recipient of the Adam Clayton Powell Award for contributing to Black political awareness ; Rep. Eva Clayton, recipient of the George Thomas " Mickey " Leland Humanitarian @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ William Lucy, recipient of the Harold Washington Award for excellence in coalition building ; Danny Bakewell, Sr., recipient of the George W. Collins Award for community service ; and Ms. Laura W. Murphy, recipient of the William L. Dawson Award for research and leadership in legislation that addresses the needs of minorities in the U. S. Those honored for receiving the Chairman 's Award were William Brooks, retired Vice President of Corporate Affairs for General Motors ; Dr. John Hope Franklin ; and James B. Duke, professor of history emeritus, Duke University. Jason Charles Smoot, a sophomore at Morehouse College, received the Youth Community Service Award in the amount of $10,000. Among the many other distinguished guests who attended the CBCALC events were NAACP President Kweisi Mfume, celebrated attorney Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., U.S. Labor Secretary Alexis Herman and U.S. Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater. <p> 
