4025041 Major shifts in economic life have always been accompanied by corresponding changes in the public 's economic morality. Contemporary globalization is pulling the moral agent in opposite directions : greater moral obligations versus the competitive individualism required by an increasingly unforgiving marketplace. Moreover, the market, not governments or the grassroots, is emerging as the dominant determinant of popular economic morality and is profoundly reshaping people 's self-understanding as persons and as a human community. The article argues that theological ethics plays an important role in contesting the market 's moral baseline. THE CHURCH HAS BEEN DESCRIBED AS the " longest-running counter-weight to the dogmas of a pure market. "( n1) Global economic integration and the increasing " marketization " of society accentuate this role even further. More than ever, the church and theological ethics, by extension, have important contributions to make in the pluralistic public square of ideas and debate on the appropriate ethos for the contemporary political economy. Tectonic shifts in the economic terrain invariably precipitate corresponding changes in " popular morality " as the public grapples with the new problems spawned by @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the marketplace, the more substantive is the resulting adjustment in the public 's economic morality. For example, the industrial age inaugurated large-scale production in the postfeudal economy in which propertyless workers sold their services in exchange for much-needed wages. In response to abuses from such wage-labor contractual arrangements, the Victorian era ushered in modern labor legislation. Today, we are witnessing a radical integration of national economies into a single global marketplace. Contemporary economic globalization is no less profound and life-defining in its impact than the Industrial Revolution was for the last 200 years. The howls of protest and the strident public debates over the benefits and the ills of globalization highlight the link between changes in the economic terrain and corresponding shifts in our moral thinking. Globalization is not merely about the integration of national markets ; it is also about the harmonization of marketplace ethos worldwide. In what follows, I examine two challenges posed by globalization. The more immediate problem is the growing wedge between moral responsibility, on the one hand, versus economic @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a second, even deeper and more consequential problem--the emergence of a market-generated morality. I conclude this article by illustrating the potential contribution of theological ethics with a brief exposition on the contemporary relevance of Populorum progressio in addressing the two aforesaid issues.IMMEDIATE CHALLENGE : GROWING WEDGE The immediate problem is the increasing wedge between moral responsibility and economic expediency. People are being pulled in opposite directions : their mutual obligations, on the one hand, versus the economic realities and demands of the global marketplace, on the other.Moral Responsibilities We are currently shifting from an industrial to a postindustrial, globalized " knowledge economy. " Significant changes are underway in how people live, work, and interact. However, there is a substantial difference between the Industrial Revolution and what we are going through today. Unlike earlier technical achievements, we have never seen anything like the speed and scope of technological changes enabled by microelectronics. The processing capacity of microelectronics doubles every 18 months( Moore 's law), and the bandwidth capacity, that is, the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 's Law). This means that every three years, our ability to process data increases fourfold, while our capacity to transmit data increases 27-fold.( n2) In fact, the Economist notes that if the same pace of technological development were replicated in manufacturing, cars today would cost $5 and run 250,000 miles on a gallon of gas.( n3) The pace of contemporary technological development is astounding. But there is more. In the last 200 years, cheap cotton, iron, steel, steam power, electricity, and oil led to a massive improvement in production and transportation. Today it is not merely production and transportation that have been transformed ; the market itself is undergoing radical change. More significant than microchips in themselves is what they made possible : the ready availability of better and inexpensive information. And since information is the lifeblood of economic exchange, the market has become ever more efficient at allocating resources to their most valued uses.( n4) This radical transformation of the marketplace has enormous ramifications for @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the demands of these changes often compel us to choose one over the other. Consider the following comparison between moral and economic demands in an increasingly unforgiving marketplace. I note at least three changes in our moral obligations. First, information technologies have turned us into a " networked " or a " wired " society. Communications and the dissemination of information have become rapid, indeed, virtually instantaneous--a state described as the " death of distance " in which geography has become increasingly irrelevant.( n5) This means that we have greater moral responsibility for one another 's welfare. Nor can we plead ignorance of the plight of others halfway across the globe. Moreover, we can no longer claim that we are unaware of the ripple effects of our actions and decisions on others. We have easy access to information. And with increase in knowledge comes an increase in moral responsibility for both rectifying the harmful, unintended consequences of our actions and providing assistance to those in need. There is a much lower threshold for what @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ our moral obligations due to globalization stems from our greatly enhanced ability to accumulate surplus. The Industrial Revolution inaugurated mass production and mass consumption. We have moved from the premodern economy of subsistence to our modern economy of abundance. Today we take the accumulation of surplus for granted, as a normal, indeed, an expected aspect of economic life. Despite its flaws, the market economy has been pivotal not only in supporting more people than ever, but also in sustaining this larger population base at a much higher standard of living. Contemporary globalization has magnified these gains further. For example, it is estimated that globalization has raised living standards in the United States alone by as much as a $1 trillion per year, or roughly $10,000 per household.( n6) The capacity to produce this surplus is evident at all levels of economic agency. At a personal level, an indirect but telling effect of our greater capacity for production is the increased opportunities afforded economic agents to provide for the needy. Economic progress invariably @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ time. As people earn more, become better educated, and live longer, they can do many more things in life. In other words, the " opportunity cost " of their time increases because they have so many more choices in life. Such freedom represents available surplus for investment and gift-giving. At a national level, there has been a telescoping of the development process. Prior to our current period of globalization, Japan and the Asian Tigers( Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong) attained within a generation what took the United States and Western Europe a whole century to achieve. Today, China is setting new records that are even better than those of its East Asian neighbors. Not only can we produce more, but we are able to do so at a much faster pace. At a global level, we can best appreciate the scale of available resources by comparing them with the requirements of poverty alleviation, such as the Millennium Development Goals. For most of human history @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the Industrial Revolution this figure rose tenfold to 1.2% per year.( n7) Since the year 2000, world output has grown anywhere from 2 to 4% per year. Note that these growth rates are actually even more impressive if one remembers that they are calculated from an ever larger base to begin with. As of 2005, world GDP is $45 trillion.( n8) In contrast, note the requirements of the Millennium Development initiative : a 2002 World Bank study estimated that achieving the Millennium Development Goals by the year 2015 will require an additional annual aid of $40 to 60 billion, a near doubling of current levels of official development assistance.( n9) By any measure( economic growth rates, speed of development, financial assets, or the value of time), globalization has enhanced our capacity to create surplus and wealth at all levels of the economy : personal, corporate, national, and global. We are in a much better position today than any other generation to help the poor. Subsistence living is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Given our better access to real-time information and our better capacity to provide substantive assistance to the needy wherever they may be in the world, failure to do so becomes inexcusable. The third change in our moral obligations comes with the expansion in the scope of market operations. More nations are now part of the web of international trade. The cross-border movement of goods, services, and peoples has intensified, both in terms of volume and speed. Services that used to be nontradables are now routinely bought and sold in the global marketplace. Information technologies have made offshore outsourcing not only possible but even a matter of business survival. Anything that can be digitized and put through a cable or a phone line can now be traded with the click of a mouse. We have seen this in virtually every area--data entry, call centers, architectural design, accounting, software programming, and even routine legal paperwork. Indeed, a distinctive feature of globalization has been the functional integration of the whole world into a single workshop @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ people around the globe, whom we will probably never meet but with whom we are now bound in ever tighter economic ties. Put succinctly and using the language of Pope John Paul II 's encyclical Laborem exercens( 1981), we are de facto ever more each other 's indirect employers and employees. This reality changes the moral equation. In becoming more interdependent, we create, by our economic decisions, more immediate and profound ripple effects, both beneficial and adverse, far beyond our local communities. The collective impact of our buying and selling behavior causes price changes. These price changes represent a redistribution of burdens and benefits across the community. Every price change results in winners and losers. We can but must not ignore the distributive ramifications of price adjustments. Global market integration should push us to address the adverse, if unintended, consequences of our choices in the marketplace. Take the case of the price for tortillas, an essential staple in Mexico. In early 2007, its price suddenly jumped by @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the increase in demand for corn from its northern neighbor, the United States, to make ethanol fuel as part of its push for greater energy independence.( n10) While hardly causing a ripple in the huge U.S. economy, this rise in demand for ethanol from corn inflicted real costs, especially on the poor, in the much smaller Mexican economy. To appreciate the full impact of this sudden 40% increase in the price of tortillas, it is important to remember that food expenditures constitute a substantial part of the poor 's budget( Engel 's Law). In the interconnected world of a single global economy, energy policy, fuel efficiency standards, and personal driving preferences and habits in the developed world have a direct impact on millions of others, not only in emerging nations but even among the poor in the U.S. and Western Europe. A similar example of adverse market ripple effects is the agricultural protectionism of the major developed nations. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development( OECD) members ' farm subsidies @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ on the poorest in these nations, the rural population. People 's economic decisions and behavior are never merely private, not in an era of globalization, even if they themselves can afford to pay for these choices. Economic choices have a large and unavoidable social dimension, and people should attend to the adverse consequences that their choices inflict on others, especially on those least able to fend for themselves.( n11) In sum, globalization has raised the bar for our moral obligations. Greater economic interdependence has made us one another 's indirect employers and employees. Better access to information has led to a much improved capacity to provide assistance. Consequently, today, when we talk of our moral accountability for economic outcomes, we are most likely moving from remote to proximate material cooperation and perhaps even to formal cooperation. Globalization has intensified or given rise to new moral obligations. We are increasingly morally accountable for market operations.Economic Expediency I now turn to the other side of the balance sheet, the economic demands of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is so much faster, given the speed with which we can turn data into " actionable information. " Competition is much more intense across the entire economy. Individual economic actors are deeply wary of having their jobs outsourced and are constantly pressed to acquire new skills. Firms have to keep cutting costs to maintain their market share. Local communities and states outdo each other with fiscal incentives to entice foreign direct investments that create employment. OECD nations have a difficult time replacing jobs that have gone overseas in the process of deindustrialization that globalization has accelerated. Deindustrialization is neither new nor peculiar to globalization. It is a normal part of economic growth as nations move from agriculture to industry to services. The difference is that information technologies have precipitated intense competition along the entire range of products and services including many of the " high-tech " jobs. Digital technologies have robbed the OECD nations of the luxury of time to shift from industry to services at their own leisure. The market now sets the pace for them. Multinational @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the process of globalization, but empirical evidence suggests otherwise. In the 1950s, 90% of industry leaders easily maintained their market standing ; in the 1960s the figure was still an impressive 85%. In contrast, only 20% of market leaders in 1985 still held that position by 1995.( n12) Only one out of every four Fortune 500 companies survived between 1980 and 1995, the rest being absorbed in mergers and takeovers.( n13) Financial globalization has made capital markets even more powerful and unforgiving. There is ever less room for the stakeholder model of corporate governance or for corporate social responsibility. The pressure is intense on firms to focus on the bottom line and be attentive to their shareholders ' interests as a matter of survival. The recent union wage and benefits concessions in the airline and automotive industries are an even better illustration of the power of the marketplace.( n14) Not even entire nations and continents are immune from the discipline imposed by the marketplace. The long-standing practice of lifetime employment in Japan has been @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ social economy to become leaner and more market-oriented in an effort to remain competitive.( n15) Even traditionally dirigiste France is attempting to make its labor market more flexible.( n16) These policy adjustments point to the potency of the marketplace in trumping even national sovereignty. In other words, economic life has become all-absorbing. Economic agents at every level--personal, corporate, industrial, and national--are besieged by the unrelenting demands of an extremely competitive global marketplace. Intel 's Andrew Grove entitled his book Only the Paranoid Survive.( n17) While amusing, the title is descriptive of the market environment brought about by globalization. Developed nations are increasingly preoccupied with cushioning their own populations from the adjustment costs of international trade. Given such uncertainty and fear, global poverty alleviation programs, such as the Millennium Development initiative, run the risk of being overshadowed by the domestic problems spawned by globalization in the industrialized nations. The substantial cross-border resource transfers necessary to eradicate the most overt forms of poverty are highly unlikely.( n18) In fact, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to their electorate, governments are compelled to increase their domestic spending to cushion the ill effects of international trade.( n19) In sum, globalization has changed both the moral and the economic terrain. Global economic integration and the Information Revolution have expanded people 's mutual responsibilities for each other, even as ever more exacting demands from the global marketplace compel economic agents to be absorbed with their own problems. Globalization has called into play bipolar forces : the centripetal force of moral responsibility pulling people closer together as a community and the centrifugal force of economic expediency spinning them off to greater individualism. Economic agents are caught between the moral requirements of an intensified formal and proximate material cooperation, on the one hand, and the harsh requirements of economic survival, on the other. It is ironic that, as the digital era has opened new possibilities for life together as a truly global community for the first time in human history, the international marketplace is pushing people further and further from each other.DEEPER CHALLENGE : SHAPING THE MARKETPLACE @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ On the surface markets may appear to be amoral and value-free, but they are in fact heavily laden with philosophical commitments. What may appear to be unregulated, smoothly functioning markets based on utility- and profit-maximizing behavior are, in fact, undergirded by a web of supporting institutions and cultural norms of dos and don'ts on what is permissible behavior and what is shameful or blameworthy. These rules of proper market behavior are handed down from earlier rounds of economic activity, refined over time to take account of changed market conditions, and then further reinforced as subsequent generations observe and pass them on in the next rounds of economic exchange. These all-important formal and informal rules of thumb comprise the market 's de facto moral baseline. For example, take the case of the infamous Larry Summers 's World Bank memo on the export of dirty industries from the developed world to emerging nations.( n20) There are impeccable, indeed rational, economic arguments for transferring polluting industries to undeveloped regions of the world. The costs associated with morbidity @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ lower in emerging countries compared to industrialized nations. Moreover, poor nations need the additional income. Despite these economic arguments, no one would dare take Summers 's memo seriously because of the expected public outcry over the policy he proposed.The Market 's Moral Baseline The market 's moral baseline is founded on custom, law, and usage developed over time. It is comprised of both formal and informal rules. The formal rules come largely from the public sector. For example, we have progressive income taxation, welfare safety nets, antitrust oversight, agricultural subsidies, and trade-adjustment assistance programs as part of our political economy. The informal conventions stem from the economic grassroots, that is, the households, consumers, firms, and nongovernmental organizations. For example, some people go out of their way to invest only in socially responsible firms, consume only organically grown food, avoid beef, recycle, offset their " carbon footprint, " and boycott products or services from corporations deemed immoral in their marketing or employment practices. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ are important sources of the market 's moral baseline. However, there is a third major source of popular economic morality that is often even more powerful than either the public sector or the economic grassroots. The market itself is a significant determinant of the public 's moral baseline. And, unlike grassroots campaigns and government legislation, the market can generate its own morality with hardly any fanfare. In fact, one could call this a " creeping morality. " Left on their own, market conventions eventually take root as part of the community 's ethos ; they are self-reinforcing in that the more widespread they are, the more they become the norm. Take the case of the use of stock options. Such a practice became common in the 1990s in an effort to link CEO pay to market-based performance. This was believed to make for more efficient outcomes. Such compensation arrangements have gone largely unnoticed and have become the norm in the marketplace. Attempts to regulate or even reverse them have been difficult because these pay @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ way things are done " in the marketplace. Note, too, the outsized pay of hedge fund managers and the industry practice of declaring these as capital gains in order to minimize income taxes. Or take the case of excessive credit card interest charges and penalties, usurious payday and subprime lending, and, lately, the teaser rates used in home mortgage financing. All these have quietly become standard practice in the marketplace until the recent public outcry. In a much earlier generation, employment, compensation, and promotions were determined by gender or by the color of one 's skin. Indeed, an unfettered market can take on a life of its own and set its own moral baseline. The market will generate its own morality by default. It will fill the vacuum left by public indifference or by governments ' unwillingness to second-guess market operations and outcomes. Furthermore, certain powerful factors give the market great advantages over either the economic grassroots or governments in forming the public 's economic morality. First, the predominant @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 1) the commitment in Western societies to pluralism as a political goal,( 2) the great appeal of utilitarianism as an ethical methodology, and( 3) the proven track record of the market in producing enormous economic gains. This complementary triad is ultimately geared to preserving and expanding the sphere of personal autonomy : utilitarianism leaves it to up to the individual to specify and pursue the preferences to be maximized ; pluralism welcomes--indeed, encourages--a wide diversity of ends ; and an unfettered market gives private initiative extensive economic freedoms, far more than any other social institution. The market does not promote any particular philosophical commitment, except for allocative efficiency as the principal distributive criterion. It permits people to pursue whatever ends they desire for as long as they have the necessary purchasing power to pay for their choices. The market is merely a mechanism for efficiently facilitating voluntary, mutually advantageous exchanges and is not a moral gatekeeper that evaluates the " goodness " or even the propriety of these exchanges and their corollary activities( i.e. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and praxes of free markets, pluralism, and utilitarianism not only dovetail with each other well, but, in fact, they mutually reinforce each other 's claims. Thus, the presumption is to leave the market alone and, in effect, to allow it to set its own moral baseline. Second, globalization and microelectronics have greatly expanded the scale and the reach of market operations. Today, more than at any time, we are ever more reliant on market operations. Previously untraded goods and services are now increasingly and routinely exchanged in the marketplace : for example, child care, household work, care for elderly parents, human ova and sperm, blood, and commercial surrogacy. Many people are dying for want of kidney donors, and some nations have alleviated this shortage by permitting a market for kidneys. The market mechanism has also been employed to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions( through the trading of pollution rights), curtail overfishing( through the assignment of fishing rights), and protect elephant herds from @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ profit from tourism and limited hunting). Indeed, the market is an extremely cost-effective mechanism for allocation and for linking people 's self-interest to socially desirable goals( as in the case of elephant poaching for ivory). Not even governments have been spared the encroachment of markets. Privatization has become common practice in many operations traditionally reserved to governments, such as the collection of back taxes, mail delivery, military logistics and security, and even the management of entire school systems and prisons. Indeed, there has been a dramatic expansion in the role of the marketplace at both the national and international levels. Third, many have examined the role of globalization in radically transforming economic life. However, they have paid scant attention to how globalization is quietly but surely reshaping the public 's economic morality. Globalization has precipitated an increasing harmonization of rules, practices, institutions, and even marketplace ethos across nations both by choice and by necessity. Cultural convergence in tastes happens mostly by choice. One could think of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ television productions, music, Starbucks, KFC, McDonald 's, and other major brand names. However, the harmonization of economic institutions and practices takes place by necessity because of the interconnected nature of economies and the need to synchronize them. Consider the convergence in the following sampling of economic practices and preferences as part of an emerging global marketplace morality : -- the commitment to open markets -- the public shame attached to mercantilistic practices and foreign exchange manipulation for trade advantages -- intellectual private property protection( TRIPS) -- restraints on greenhouse-gas emission -- an increasing global disapproval and phaseout of agricultural subsidies -- coordinated efforts at eradicating corruption and money laundering -- the ban on ivory and similar products to slow down poaching of endangered wildlife -- international restrictions on whale hunting and overfishing -- economic embargoes on odious governments -- compulsory licensing for key life-saving drugs Nations of the world have increasingly cooperated on marketplace rules and even set up multilateral institutions, such as the World Trade Organization, with powers that trump national sovereignty. These practices reflect an @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ international economic behavior. The upshot in all this : Globalization gives the market a formidable built-in edge over either the economic grassroots or governments as a determinant of popular economic morality. After all, one must remember that, to begin with, globalization is about the increasing " marketization " of the world. It is the market that interconnects nations, and thus, unless overridden by extramarket interventions, its rules and implicit ethos will apply. Moreover, the minimalist moral claims of the market and its underlying utilitarianism are ideal from the viewpoint of nation-states because they minimize globalization 's encroachment on national sovereignty. Thus, left on its own, this globalizing marketplace will shape the public 's moral baseline. We already have a glimpse into the consequences of such a market-shaped morality in the EU 's difficulty in maintaining its social economy and in the numerous anecdotal accounts of a race to the bottom on labor and environmental regulations. Only a deliberate and concerted effort can introduce effective extramarket interventions that hold back a market-shaped morality. The @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ concern over the aforesaid self-generated market morality because it can quietly but effectively shape the self-worth and the self-identity of unsuspecting market participants. Our moral acts, including our economic choices, have a reflexive dynamic to them in that they come back to define and form who we are. Thus, a utilitarian, market-shaped morality eventually manifests itself concretely in an ethos of economism, materialism, consumerism, productionism, individualism, and impersonalism. In economism, the language and the tools of economics become the prism with which to view and evaluate life. Social phenomena ranging from voting behavior, altruism, religious beliefs and practices, and even the interpretation of law have been explained in terms of the rational choice model.( n21) Economics has come to dominate the formulation of people 's worldviews. In fact, an emerging scholarship examines economics as a religion in itself.( n22) Not surprising, many lament the " imperialism of economics, " as the tools and theoretical models of neoclassical economics encroach on the other social sciences, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ more is always better, and economic progress is well served by an acquisitive and possessive ethos.( n24) Thus, economic advancement is gauged in terms of ever higher levels of consumption. Acquisition and consumption are life 's highest values. People are defined by their consumption basket. Furthermore, individual economic agents ought to be left to their own preferences since they know what is in their best interest. Consumers enjoy complete sovereignty over their choices and should be left alone. Thus, we have witnessed a pervasive brand consciousness and a desire for status goods.( n25) Note the expensive tastes of the nouveau riche of China who emulate their Western counterparts in the consumption of ultra-status goods.( n26) Productionism is the belief in the pivotal importance of production. It is the mirror image of consumerism, because one can consume only what is produced. We produce only that we might accumulate and consume. There is no intrinsic joy to productive life, no sense of the inherent value of work as an expression of one @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and as a means of contributing to society. Many, in the interests of productivity, voluntarily forego paid vacation days to which they are entitled.( n27) A person 's worth is often gauged as a function of the market value he/she is able to produce. Moreover, our culture has been described as a " winner-take-all " society in which we reward the top performer handsomely, but not the runner-up. In the competitive ethos of the marketplace, winning is everything and is greatly rewarded. Second place is not good enough.( n28) Another effect of productionism is the complete indifference to ecological damage in the inordinate push for economic growth at any price--new oil exploration-drilling, for example. Materialism accords primacy to the material over the spiritual or even denies altogether a transcendent dimension to human existence. Empirical evidence suggests that the accumulation and enjoyment of wealth and material possessions in many nations( especially Europe) have been accompanied by a decline in religiosity.( n29) In both individualism and impersonalism, interpersonal relations are purely @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ specifies ; there is no empathy or sense of connectedness with others. The person is treated as no more than a potential customer, a contractual partner, or a factor of production. In other words, the person is viewed purely as an economic agent with whom one can potentially transact mutually advantageous exchanges. In sum, while the market economy has been pivotal in improving human welfare in the last 300 years, it is important to recognize that, left on its own, the market will shape popular economic morality in ways that are deeply damaging to people 's self-understanding as persons and as a community. It would be truly paradoxical if globalization were to merely exchange one form of poverty for another. One example is globalization 's potential erosion of traditional family values.( n30) IS THERE A NEED FOR THEOLOGICAL ETHICS? In the final analysis, there is a fourth determinant of the popular economic baseline that can trump the market 's self-generated morality, namely, the conscientious behavior of the common economic actor. Most @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ checks, they work assiduously without supervision, and they deliver goods and services in the quantity and quality they had promised. While there have been numerous instances of fraud in e-Bay exchanges, identity thefts, and e-mail scams, economic transactions for the most part have been honest and satisfactorily consummated. In fact, most market exchanges operate on the basis of trust and people 's word of honor. The mail order industry, e-commerce, and the returns policy of many retailers would not work at all if people were fundamentally predatory and dishonest. The smooth functioning of markets largely depends on the personal integrity of their participants. Many of these customary practices remain unwritten or are legally unenforceable. Yet, they are widely observed because they are accepted to be constitutive of their community 's moral fiber and character. Many economic agents internalize these rules of common decency in their personal behavior out of their own self-respect and integrity. Such public economic morality is culturally conditioned. The degree to which such received wisdom is preserved, internalized @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ society 's appreciation for( 1) the nature of the human person,( 2) the nature of the human community, and( 3) the nature of economic life. Developing or further sharpening such understanding is an important task, as globalization remaps both the economic and the moral terrain. And, indeed, we find promising signs of such self-introspection. On September 8, 2000, the world 's heads of state adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration.( n31) This resolution boldly called for concrete steps in the elimination of the direst forms of poverty. In what was later reformulated as the eight Millennium Development Goals, nations pledged themselves to work toward improving the lives of hundreds of millions of people who have heretofore known only suffering, want, and destitution. What is even more remarkable is section 6 of the Declaration in which nations solemnly declared the fundamental values animating their common commitment to eradicating poverty in the new millennium, to wit : freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect for nature @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ between moral duty and economic expediency, nations have in fact pledged themselves to respond to globalization by taking mutual responsibility for each other 's welfare. Far from allowing the marketplace to impose its own utilitarian ethos, nations have employed extramarket measures to imbue international relations with human values. The UN Millennium Goals and the UN Millennium Declaration are proof that a secular, pluralistic public square of ideas and debate such as the UN 's General Assembly is more than capable of dealing with globalization 's adverse ripple effects. Thus, one may legitimately ask whether or not we need theological ethics at all as we grapple with a shifting international political economy.DISTINCTIVE CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THEOLOGICAL ETHICS Despite the remarkable vision of the UN Millennium Goals and the underlying General Assembly resolution, there is still much that theological ethics can uniquely contribute in mitigating globalization 's ills. Given the breadth and diversity of theological ethics, I will limit my illustration in this concluding section to contributions from Pope Paul VI 's Populorum progressio( 1967), the very first encyclical in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the issues of international political economy, global trade, and economic development. The UN Millennium Declaration has a bold but incomplete anthropology. In the first place, the aforesaid fundamental values it pledges to uphold seem eclectic. Where do they come from? How are they related to each other? Why do we have to subscribe to them and how do we justify them? Why limit ourselves only to these values? Is there an overarching framework tying all of them together? Second, there is a world of difference between setting laudable goals and ideals for ourselves and actualizing them. Populorum progressio 's notion of integral human development illustrates the potential contribution of theological ethics to contemporary political economy. The encyclical contends that development is authentic only if it is human and integral. In its view, therefore, genuine development is neither merely nor even principally economic in nature. Development is primarily a moral phenomenon. Authentic development is integral and transcendent in two senses. First, it is integral because it transcends material needs and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ hunger : union with God. This is the primary relationship of human existence. It is the reference point and the basis for meaning and purpose in human experience. From this comes a second sense in which development is integral and transcendent. Development is integral because it transcends the individual and reaches out toward others. Flowing from the aforesaid primary relationship are the other gifts from God : the gift of each other and the gift of the earth. That primary relationship( with God) defines and shapes the obligations that flow from all our other ties. The person can flourish only in community. Far from being at odds with each other, the good of the individual and of the community are necessarily interdependent. We can not be integral in our development of body, mind, and spirit unless others are also able to reach their own integral development. Thus, authentic development is distinctively integral and human because it entails( 1) the development of the whole person : body, mind, and spirit, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ no one excluded. These two constitutive elements of Populorum progressio 's integral human development, while distinct from each other, are inseparable. Each is a function of the other. Given this understanding of human development, Populorum progressio goes beyond the fundamental values of the UN 's Millennium Declaration in a number of ways. First, it is not satisfied merely with the social virtue of tolerance but aims for something much better, the union of hearts and minds. It wants more than just a juridic public order ; it wants the common good.( n32) Persons are bound to one another by something more than a social contract or the need to share resources and the expediency of mutual survival. Persons are bound by natural ties with strong attendant obligations for one another 's well-being. Thus, unlike many other experiences of social living, including economic life, integral human development allows no one to be left behind. It is a journey toward human flourishing that can only be completed together. Development is relational ; it @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ development, while important, is merely a means to this much greater and even more profound end. A second distinctive improvement is the richer specification of the nature of moral agency. Our actions, both economic and noneconomic, have a reflexive dimension and a self-reinforcing dynamic. The human person transcends material needs and yearns for truth, love, friendship, and justice. In the process of seeking the highest of human values, the human person transcends the self and reaches out toward others. And as we reach out and relate to others with sincerity and solicitude, we find ourselves growing and perfected in these human values. Thus, as already noted, Populorum progressio is adamant that, contrary to popular belief and convention, development is neither merely nor even principally economic in nature. It is primarily a moral phenomenon. Finally, it is very likely that most people look at the Millennium Development Goals in terms of donors versus aid recipients, that is, wealthy nations dispensing aid to emerging nations. Moreover, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ view such resource transfers as acts of supererogation and charity, aid out of the goodness of their hearts. Under Populorum progressio 's aforesaid notion of development, developed nations should realize that pursuing the Millennium Development Goals is( 1) an obligation and( 2) consistent with their self-identity as persons and as a human community. This self-understanding is a constant reminder that nations, like persons, never attain their own integral human development in the face of unaddressed frank poverty.CONCLUSION Globalization is not merely about the integration of national markets but is also about the harmonization of the marketplace 's institutions and ethos worldwide. Because of the proven track record of the market in bringing about impressive economic and technological gains in the last 300 years, the presumption is to leave the market on its own unless a compelling case can be presented that it is in the self-interest of the community to do otherwise. This is especially so in the face of consistent and decisive empirical evidence showing how market-oriented nations have by far outpaced those that are restrictive. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ when to intervene but also why. Because the " burden of proof " lies with those who call for extramarket interventions, it is critical to be secure in our understanding of the nature of the economy and in our understanding of who we are as persons and as a community. Populorum progressio and, by extension, theological ethics have much to offer in these three areas, but they will have to perform a dual task of presenting a powerful case for extramarket interventions and doing it in a language and reasoning accessible and convincing to a pluralistic, secular audience. Any group or nation wishing to take a direct hand in shaping the market 's moral baseline has to present an alternative market morality, so enticing as to compel nations to forego the considerable economic benefits of contemporary market processes and operations. It is important to present a vision that sells itself.( n34) Populorum progressio 's notion of integral human development is one such vision. In addition, it rests on an anthropology that prevents the marketplace from distorting @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and shaping the public 's economic morality take on even greater importance and urgency, given that it is the grassroots that often initiate and shape public legislation, occasionally even in nondemocratic states. Using the language of international trade theory, we can say that setting hearts and minds alight with a prophetic spirit of justice and love is the comparative advantage of theological ethics.Footnotes 
