4081241 The memories of Victoria Climbi had yet to fade when the storm broke over the case of Baby P in Haringey Council 's children 's services in 2008. The national media were in a frenzy and the government was running scared. Morale among frontline social workers was rock bottom while the former director of children 's services, Sharon Shoesmith, was pursuing a judicial review of the decision to remove her from her post. Into this scene walked Peter Lewis -- the man appointed by children 's secretary Ed Balls, as the new director of Haringey 's children 's services, to steer the troubled department into calmer waters. " It 's certainly pressurised when the eyes of the world are upon you, " the 55-year-old says. " Particularly when you yourself want to do the best job you can. The pressure is internal and external. But the pressure is part of what helps one to get on and do things and maintain the pressure and momentum. " Lewis joined the council in January 2009 and immediately set about creating a three-year plan with clear deadlines and an @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ by Ofsted after the first year and " outstanding " by 2012. Last week, the second Ofsted progress report during his reign pronounced that he was on his way to achieving these targets. It must have been a relief given that the first Ofsted report, after a visit in June 2009, issued a damning verdict with children still not considered adequately safeguarded. However, the inspectors at the time said they had felt uncomfortable about investigating the council so soon after Lewis 's appointment. Balls agreed to wait for their second report before deciding if he would intervene any further. " You 'll have to ask the secretary of state, " Lewis replies evasively when asked if the progress report is good enough to avoid further government intervention. " But we 're pleased with this report because people have worked very hard to keep the momentum going so if it does n't get noticed and recorded it feels much harder to keep it up. " It must also be difficult when old cases keep cropping up to reignite headlines @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ on Baby Y, published some months ago on the local children 's safeguarding board website, but seized on by the Daily Telegraph as evidence Haringey is trying to bury such reports. " Baby Y is the last of the serious case reviews of that era, " he says with evident relief. " They 're all dealt with now. What I ca n't predict is if problems in cases will arise in families where our involvement in them dates back to that era. I 'm not aware of any at the moment though. " It is clear that supporting his frontline social workers has been a major focus. Improvements to the Integrated Children 's System and more administration staff mean social workers are spending less time in front of computer screens, he claims. " We 've made a big effort to improve supervision. We 've brought in additional training and support, especially direct support to make sure that managers really understand the issues frontline workers are facing in safeguarding. " An innovative scheme where senior management staff @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ some of their child protection cases has, he believes, improved social worker morale. REFLECTIVE PRACTICE " The reality is that when bosses take a real interest in both you and the quality of the work you do, then you feel you can do the work. " Social work staff have also been sent on training courses at the Tavistock Centre to encourage reflective practice. " We 're now looking for another gear to change up into but it 's a fine balance between ensuring quality of social work practice remains high and increasing the pace of change. " He denies his political appointment has caused him problems in forging relationships with councillors and other agencies. Councillors have been incredibly supportive, he says. " By the time I arrived there was also a clear recognition by everyone around that partnership table that something had gone terribly wrong and it was the responsibility of all of us to get it right. " Partnership working with the police was particularly commended by Ofsted although it was noted that there was still a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. However, Lewis says it is unfair to say this means GPs are not on board with changes. " You ask any local authority how easy it is to engage with GPs and they will all say they have their own challenges. It 's not peculiar to Haringey. But I would say we have had much better engagement than in the past. We 've had 400 people from GP practices on child protection courses so far and that is a huge success rate. " When it comes to Ofsted he pointedly ignores the furore over the inspectorate 's original joint area review and whistleblower allegations that the rating was changed after the report was written. He says his experience of their inspections has been positive. " The team that was here was very strong and experienced. The lead inspector was the same as the one in June. From our perspective that continuity has been helpful and it 's been a professional process. I think people can be reasonably confident in the report. " For Lewis, Ofsted is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ he is keen to have as many as possible. All child protection cases are also independently audited regularly and there are external people tracking every change made to monitor effects on quality and improvement. NO COMPLACENCY Lewis is determined that no complacency creeps in as services improve " When the Climbi case happened the problems were n't just in Haringey but nationwide. When people had done what was needed, they felt they had finished the work, but this job will never be done. We 've got to forever keep up the pressure to drive improvements. " He is philosophical about being in the eye of the media 's gaze. " I think we children 's services occupy a very difficult place in the public mind, and the media is just a reflection of that mind. " We all have a reaction to some of the things that are done to children. It is our job to deal with our reaction in a measured way, to make sure the response is proportionate. " LEWIS CAREER HIGHLIGHTS * Spent @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ special schools. * He was head of children 's services in Southampton before moving to take up the statutory DCS role at Enfield Council in 2004. * His contract at Haringey continues until 2011. PHOTO( COLOR) : Lewis : Pressure to improve must be maintained By Judy Cooper EDITED BY Judy Cooper 
