4004741 As a physical educator, it is somewhat interesting to ask students, as well as adults from the general population, a simple question. " If you took a true high school physical education class, what was it like? " Many respondents indicate that their remembrances are similar to what Dougherty and Bonanno( 1987) refer to as the traditional, or activity-based, curriculum. This curricular pattern is based almost entirely on the activity, or sport, that is currently in season. This type of program is advantageous for the students in the class who are interested in the sport in season. In many instances, there is very little instruction involved in this curricular form. The emphasis is on allowing the students to play the activity, and little else. The emphasis of this program is primarily on team sports, with very little time being given to activities that would be considered lifetime sports. Unfortunately, this curricular pattern remains very popular in many high schools today( Dougherty &; Bonanno, 1987). When this curricular pattern is used in a manner @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it is then difficult to justify to administrators the value of physical education. This type of physical education curriculum does not appear to meet the challenges that school physical education currently faces( Dougherty &; Bonanno, 1987). <p> A current topic of interest is how well current secondary physical education is achieving such objectives as the development of appropriate levels of health-related physical fitness( HRPF). There appears to be an assumption that in general, youth in America are not as physically fit as they were 20 to 30 years ago, although certain researchers( Corbin &; Pangrazi, 1992) question the validity of this statement. Another question that perhaps is just as important concerns the development of positive attitudes toward physical activity by high school students. There is little or no empirical evidence which suggests that current students ' attitudes toward physical activity are less positive than the attitudes of past students. However, the development of positive attitudes toward physical activity in today 's physical education students remains an important objective of the physical educator. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @) found that physically inactive adults were not likely to have engaged in physical activity during adolescence, suggesting that the subjects lacked favorable physical activity in their adolescent years. Ferguson, Yesalis, Pomrehn, and Kirk-patrick( 1989) concluded that early development of positive attitudes toward exercise may play an important role in an individual 's inclination to maintain an active lifestyle. A goal of all physical educators should be for their students to become active, physically fit adults. The research appears to suggest that if physical educators hope to achieve this goal, they should provide their students with favorable experiences in physical activity. Teachers should also strive to help their students develop positive attitudes toward physical activity. In other words, it is important for teachers to teach the " process " of how to develop and maintain personal physical fitness. Teaching the " product " of personal physical fitness is important, but not to the exclusion of the process. Development of HRPF and of positive attitudes toward physical activity in students should continue to be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ curricular pattern is thus needed that is designed both to develop elevated levels of HRPF, and to instill positive attitudes toward physical activity in students. While traditional curricular patterns can achieve these objectives, it is the purpose of this paper to present an alternative curricular form. <p> The suggested alternative is a Foundations of Personal Fitness( FPF) course for high school students. It has been demonstrated that through participation in a course of this type, students do attain improved levels of HRPF( Murray et al., 1995). Students enrolled in a high school FPF class were able to make significant improvements in selected aspects of HRPF( strength and cardiovascular endurance). Cuddihy, Corbin, and Abbadessa( 1995) discovered that students who participated in an FPF course, when compared to students who were enrolled in a traditional physical education class, had built higher levels of intrinsic motivation and competence, which are deemed to be likely determinants of physical activity. Cuddihy et al.( 1995) also found that students developed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ physical activity, and that sedentary students became more active. Concerning Florida high school seniors who had taken the Florida-form of the FPF course in the ninth grade, Bie et al.( 1994) found that almost 80 percent of those surveyed thought all high school students should be exposed to the information contained in the FPF course. The results of these studies suggest that students are learning both the product and process of personal physical fitness. Also, three years after completing the FPF course, students continue to perceive the course to be an important part of their high school experience. The primary objectives of the FPF course would therefore be achieved. <p> While Florida led the way in the 1980 's in implementing a course of this nature, the state of Texas has been developing this course since the early 1990 's. Beginning in 1996, an( FPF) course has been mandated for Texas high school students. The FPF course was developed from the Florida model( Florida Department of Education, 1984). @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of Corbin and Lindsey( 1990). A set of Essential Elements for the course has been developed and adopted( for summary of Essential Elements, see Appendix A. For a complete copy of the Essential Elements for the course, contact the author at the University of Texas-San Antonio) which outlines the Essential Knowledge and Skills which should be discussed and developed in the course( Texas Education Agency, 1992). <p> An interesting aspect of the course is that students are placed in situations where they are allowed to participate in a variety of physical activities related to developing components of personal fitness. They are taught a variety of means to assess their own personal levels of these components of physical fitness, and are encouraged to choose the activity they will use for assessment, based on individual preference. For example, Essential Element 1( see Appendix 1) deals with analysis of components of physical fitness. Students participate in activities designed to improve one 's level of physical fitness, and are taught how to assess their @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ an example, students could be involved in such activities as jogging, walking, aerobic dance, jumping rope, or a myriad of other activities. Then, students could participate in various assessments of cardiovascular endurance : the 1.5-mile run test, the one-mile walk test, the step test, the Astrand-Ryhming test, or the 12-minute swim test( Hoeger &; Hoeger, 1994). In each student 's individual exercise plan( see Essential Element 13, Appendix 1), they will note which activity, or activities, and assessment tool they have chosen. Thus, students are placed in situations where they have the responsibility for making individual decisions which affect them ; they make choices based on individual preference. This provides an excellent opportunity for the teacher to integrate critical thinking skills and responsible decision-making into the physical education curriculum. <p> Evaluation of student level of performance in this class may take place in several forms, with performance in the psychomotor domain not being the exclusive factor for grade determination. For example, Essential @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the components of physical fitness. Not only might students be expected to be able to list and define these on a written examination, they might also be expected to participate in self-assessments to determine their personal levels of each one of the components of physical fitness. They might also be expected to be able to identify activities which would develop certain fitness components of fitness. The self-assessments might be used as a group activity, utilizing a cooperative learning style, where one group of students might be charged with identifying levels of a particular fitness component possessed by class members. They might then identify for the class a certain program of exercise or activities which would lead to improved levels of the particular fitness component. Thus, cooperation and teamwork become an emphasis. Cooperative-type activities also provide the opportunity to teach group dynamics, another desirable life skill. Other forms of written examinations and demonstration tests may also be used, as well as individual notebooks. One is limited only by imagination. <p> In conclusion, this course is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the primary benefits derived from participation in physical education and activity : developing improved levels of HRPF, learning the values of cooperation and teamwork, while allowing for individual choices and responses. The FPF course has the goal that every student will leave the course with a positive attitude toward participating in physical activity, which sounds much preferable to the perception many adults now retain of their experiences in high school physical education. While this goal may be achieved through other more traditional curricular forms, the essential elements that have been set forth for the FPF class can provide a vehicle which may be used to achieve this goal. Also, this course is presented in a way that makes it more palatable and defensible to parents, administrators, and school board members. Without the support of the above-named group, no physical education program is likely to be as successful as is desired. The FPF course can be an integral component of the total high school curriculum, and can make a major contribution to the total educational development of @ @ @ @ @ 
