248141 SCOTT SIMON, Host : By general consensus of literary critics, there are three great American political novels ; Edwin O'Connors ' The Last Hurrah, set in a Boston ruled by a mayor reminiscent of James Michael Curley sp, Billy Lee Brammer 's sp The Gay Place, set in the Texas State House presided over by a likably vulgar and countrified cunning governor who resembles Lyndon Johnson, and then there 's All the King 's Men, Robert Penn Warren 's story of compromise and conviction, the allure of power, and the power of demagogues. All the King 's Men appeared 50 years ago this month. It was, of course, read as a parable about the rise and fall of Huey Long, the Louisiana politician who overhauled his state, built a political machine, challenged President Franklin Roosevelt, and then was shot to death. We 're joined by Marshal Frady sp from Los Angeles. Mr. Frady has written classic biographies about Southerners George Wallace and Billy Graham. His latest book is a biography of Jesse Jackson, called Jesse. And Mr. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ MICHAEL FRADY, Author, ' Jesse ' : Very good to be here. SCOTT SIMON : I have to ask, as a young Southern writer was this book any kind of influence? MICHAEL FRADY : Well, it was an inescapable influence for generations by now, I would suppose, of Southern writers. It 's about a time in the South of tribal politics, before the computered electronic mutation of political power in the country, and the South has always been a- much longer than the rest of the country, a- a tribal society, where the things that matter are common experience, common struggle, common weather, and common memory, and those- those matter much more- have tended to matter much more than- than ideas and obstructions, and All the King 's Men surges right out of that particular sensibility. SCOTT SIMON : You and I, I guess, both had the sensation of- of re-reading this novel after a number of years, cramming for this interview like a- like a couple of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ section, if I could, that- that just grabbed me, and it seems to me when I first read the novel a number of years ago I was- I was almost looking for- for Huey Long in it, and I re-read this section and was just electrified by the- by Robert Penn Warren 's poetic powers. It 's a section where he essentially describes the- the formation of this backwoods area. MICHAEL FRADY : reading excerpt from ' All the King 's Men ' ' There were pine forests here a long time ago, but they 're gone. The bastards got in here and set up the mills and laid the narrow gauge tracks and knocked together the company commissaries and paid a dollar a day, and folks swarmed out of the brush for the dollar, and folks came from God knows where, riding in wagons with a chest of drawers and a bedstead canted together in the wagonbed, and five kids huddled down together, and the old woman hunched on the wagon seat with a poke bonnet @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a young one hanging on her tit. The saws sang soprano, and the clerk in the commissary passed out the blackstrap molasses and the sowbelly and wrote it in his big book, and the Yankee dollar and Confederate dumbness collaborated to heal the wounds of four years of fratricidal strife, and all was merry as a marriage bell till, all of a sudden, there were n't any more pine trees. They stripped the mills. The narrow gauge tracks got covered with grass. Folks tore down the commissaries for kindling wood. There was n't any more dollar-a-day. The big boys were gone, the diamond rings on their fingers and broadcloth on their backs, but a good many of the folks stayed right on and watched the gullies eat deeper into the red clay, and a good handful of those folks, and their heirs and assigns, stayed in Mason City, 4,000 of them, more or less. ' SCOTT SIMON : Now, Mr. Frady, from- from the Southern point of view, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ many ways, just in that one beautifully constructed paragraph? MICHAEL FRADY : It 's a deep X-ray of the South. Not only its geography, but its psyche was ravaged, of course, not just by commercial or industrial exploitation, but ravaged by that headlong folly which, generations earlier, it had flung itself into during the Civil War. And the South has been something- its experience has not been like something else setting it apart from- from the rest of the country, is that its experience has not been necessarily a scenario of optimism. It has known defeat, more than once, and it 's left- it left the South with, as it were, its own native tragic legend of- of blood and- and- and fire and guilt, particularly guilt. SCOTT SIMON : I want to talk a little about the character Robert Penn Warren creates, a man named Willy Stark, who- who rises from backwoods poverty to become governor. He begins with a number of daring and- and very worthwhile ideas @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ impulses are to help the folks and to do good. SCOTT SIMON : And what- what happens, to flash all the way ahead? MICHAEL FRADY : Well, he becomes progressively mesmerized. I mean, the great question, of course, in All the King 's Men, is can one do good by doing bad? And his impulsion, his urgency, to take the power to achieve these good ends for the people, he becomes almost mesmerized, and if not, in the end, claimed by those means, just that appetite for power that develops in him to- to achieve those- those good effects, and that lends it a, indeed, a certain tragic symmetry. SCOTT SIMON : When you talk about that appetite for power, there 's a- there 's a scene- a section in the book, a character named Sugar Boy, who- who- MICHAEL FRADY : Right. SCOTT SIMON : -who has a stutter, which I will not attempt to recreate, but he- he recollects at one @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it 's like something 's gon na burst inside of him. ' MICHAEL FRADY : And he has, as all the great tribunes have had, this- this kind of folk communion with the masses in which he becomes them enlarged, and as- as Jack Burton sp, who is sort of the Hamlet-like observer and narrator of the novel, observes, when he 's speaking people are listening to him. They feel themselves part of something that is grander and greater and more important, more aug- august, than they happen to be individually, personally. SCOTT SIMON : Mr. Frady, a literary question. MICHAEL FRADY : Uh-huh. SCOTT SIMON : We- we listed three great American political novels. I must say I was hard-pressed to think of three more that you would n't put in that company. Why are there so few great American political novels as opposed to, say, detective stories? MICHAEL FRADY : Well, that 's a very good question. That 's a very good question. SCOTT SIMON @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ poser. SCOTT SIMON : It 's not Stump the Band, Mr. Brady, you know? MICHAEL FRADY : It's- it's- this being a consummately political- political- founded in a political proposition, and its public life being so profoundly political, it is- it 's curious that there have not been more kind of Caeserian, Caeser-like tales, like All the King 's Men. I think more recently it may be that politics has- has become almost anti-dramatic, as it 's become more machined and more computed, more systematized and more denatured. SCOTT SIMON : Course, toward the very end of the novel Willy Stark is- is shot in the Rotunda and, as he 's in the hospital bed he reaches out his hand to Jack Burton and says, ' It might have all been different, Jack. ' MICHAEL FRADY : Uh-huh. SCOTT SIMON : And I found myself tearing up at that. MICHAEL FRADY : Well, he- because he remembers how he began- SCOTT SIMON : Yeah. MICHAEL FRADY : -and what @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Uh-huh. MICHAEL FRADY : -before this kind of gradual, almost indistinguishable, process of- of corruption. You know, it struck me again in- in- in going back through it, how much it is really a parable of the dark side of the moon of the democratic proposition, and the potential that 's always there for a kind of- of populist fascism, if you will, or- or major- majority totalitarianism- SCOTT SIMON : Yeah. MICHAEL FRADY : -and Willy personifies it of that- that potential, that dark potential that always lurks within the democratic process. SCOTT SIMON : Mr. Frady, it 's been a pleasure to talk to you. MICHAEL FRADY : Been exhilarating. SCOTT SIMON : Speaking with us from Los Angeles, Marshal Frady. His latest book is a biography of Jesse Jackson, called Jesse. All the King 's Men by Robert Penn Warren appeared 50 years ago this month. BRODERICK CRAWFORD : excerpt from ' All the King 's Men ' Now listen to me, you hicks! Listen @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ God 's present and fly-blown truth! And this is the truth! You 're a hick! And nobody ever helped a hick but a hick himself! All right, listen to me, listen to me! What in the heck were they gon na use to split the hick vote! But I 'm standing right here now on my hind legs! Even a dog can learn to do that! Are you standing on your hind legs? Have you learned to do that much yet? Here it is! SCOTT SIMON : Broderick Crawford as Willy Stark in the 1949 film production of All the King 's Men. And this is NPR 's Weekend Edition ; I 'm Scott Simon. This program has been professionally transcribed by Journal Graphics. JG has used its best efforts to assure the transcript accurately reflects NPR 's original broadcast, but makes no guarantees or representations that the transcription is identical to the original NPR broadcast. The official record of an NPR broadcast is the audio tape of the original broadcast.. 
