238241 BOB EDWARDS, Host : This is Morning Edition. I 'm Bob Edwards. In Moscow, a Russian scientist is awaiting trial on criminal charges for revealing the continuing development of new chemical weapons. The security ministry says Vil Mirseionov sp, a senior research chemist, allegedly divulged a state secret. The case has raised questions in the minds of some Russians about the conduct of the security ministry, formerly known as the KGB. And it 's also raised concern about the environmental damage caused by toxic agents. NPR 's Kathleen Hunt reports. KATHLEEN HUNT, Reporter : Travelling on Moscow 's busy Highway of the Enthusiasts, it 's easy to overlook the nondescript state building where most of the Soviet Union 's research on top-secret chemical weapons has been carried out. It was here in 1982 that the military began a program code-named ' Foliant sp ' to develop a deadly new nerve gas. Five years later, Mikhail Gorbachev unilaterally declared an end to chemical weapon production in the Soviet Union. But even as he spoke, scientists were continuing to develop a new @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. ' The program outlived the fall of the Soviet Union, and remained secret even while the Russians were negotiating the terms of a U.N. convention banning the production of chemical weapons. Four months before the convention was signed, the dangers of Russia 's undisclosed nerve gases compelled a soft spoken chemist named Vil Mirseionov to reveal the existence of the secret weapons program to the Russian press last September. VIL MIRSEIONOV, Chemist : through interpreter When I heard that this convention was going ahead even with this gross - close allies?, I decided to write in the newspaper that people should know the truth to daily substances in the Soviet side, Novichuk and the gas were omitted from the list of substances controlled by the convention, and also the convention does not unintelligible research so both sides can continue to create weapons that are far more awful than the one existing now @!HUNT The Russian security ministry, which everyone here still calls the KGB, struck swiftly. They arrested Mirseionov and questioned two of his colleagues who @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ week in the notorious KGB prison, Lafortiva sp and put under criminal investigation. For ten months, he 's been without work and had to sell some possessions or borrow money to feed his family. The security police also tried to muzzle several Moscow newspapers which published his information running searches and confiscating materials. To Russians who 'd forgotten the dissident days, the KGB-style operation evoked memories of the late scientist, Andrei Sakharov. Oleg Kalugin sp is a former lieutenant colonel of the KGB. He echoed the public outcry and added that Russians are going to see that the security apparatus is still very powerful. OLEG KALUGIN, Former KGB Lt. Col. : I think it 's an ominous sign of the new grounds now gained by the state security organization. After 1991, they felt weak, demoralized, and they would probably by unwilling to take up any action of this sort. Now they feel more encouraged by internal political developments in Russia. They feel now the time is coming that they may resume one way @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ activity in apartment HUNT : voice-over In his cramped apartment Mirseionov shares with his wife and two little boys, he recalls how years ago, he was alarmed by the lax security measures at the state institute. Ampules of deadly gas could easily have been carried out. But what finally made him go public was that there 's no effective international control over the development of a lethal class of nerve gases comprised of binary components. These components produce a third highly toxic weapon only after they 're combined. But as Mirseionov says, while the separate components are being produced and stored, it 's almost impossible to monitor them. Mr. MIRSEIONOV : through interpreter If we do n't know exactly what the final substance is, these binary components can be represented as common chemicals used as pesticides in agriculture, so that 's why it 's crucial that we control and prohibit even the research on binary weapons, because if not, a factory worker would not even suspect that his product could be used as a component for the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and his defense lawyer are now in the last stage of the pretrial investigation, during which they review the prosecution 's file. He 's accused of divulging a state secret related to the defense of the country by revealing the existence of the nerve gases. But the whole affair set of a chain of further revelations all the way to the Volga River, where a series of formerly closed cities formed the core of the Soviet chemical weapons complex. ambient sound of industrial activity One of the most stunning revelations came from another scientist working in a top-secret military research institute near the Volga just over the gentle hills from the port of Volsk sp. Alarmed by the arrest of Mirseionov, a 47-year-old chemist named Vladimir Ogelev sp came forward. In an interview published in a local weekly, Ogelev confirmed Mirseionov 's statements by admitting that he had actually synthesized the new phosphorous nerve gas called Novichuk. In this surreal little concrete township of 7,000 residents 600 miles east of Moscow, Olegev explains what happened after the local security @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, Chemist : through interpreter After the publication, I was not permitted to return to the departments where I worked, and could not relate my scientific groups, so this was why the article 's entitled ' An Interview With a Hangman 's Noose Around the Neck. ' I do n't know why I decided to speak up. It 's my nature, I guess. I have such a difficult character @!HUNT The short, athletically-built chemist has retained a surprising degree of humor considering that he was banished to a lesser job in a nearby civilian institute and the men he calls the former KGB open an investigation against him. ambient sound of industrial activity voice-over On both banks of Russia 's mighty Volga, the revelations of the new chemical weapons were only the prelude to a problem even more frightening to local residents. The government announced a plan to destroy its toxic weapons stockpile in the factories along the Volga where they were produced. As environmentalists began to protest the plan, the local security police intensified their activity @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Saratov sp, investigators stepped up their harassment of a local journalist for covering the environmentalists ' struggle. But 35-year-old Sergei Mihailev sp had already been a victim of menacing interrogations after publishing how the local security police still routinely use KGB tactics of blackmail and bribery in their criminal investigations. SERGEI MIHAILEV, Journalist : through interpreter The KGB began with the charge that I 'd violated my duties as a citizen, opened a major state secret and broken the law on the press, but the issue is not that I broke some laws, but that I ventured into some questionable practices of the KGB. So they decided to make something like a show of my case @!HUNT Despite concerns voiced by the United States and other countries and international appeals from scientists and Nobel laureates, few people here expect Russia 's security ministry and to dismiss the Mirseionov case. Last March, Russia 's prime minister enforced more security by signing a sweeping decree classifying all information related to chemical weapons a secret retroactively, but Mirseionov and Ogelev are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to track the new lethal nerve gases, Russia could sell the components freely and no one could prevent them from becoming deadly weapons available to anyone. This is Kathleen Hunt reporting. music EDWARDS : It 's 11 minutes before the hour. the accuracy of speakers ' words or spelling. 
