231141 BOB CAIN, Anchor : Throughout the O.J. Simpson trial, defense lawyers have been and will be trying hard to persuade jurors that police have blundered their way through their investigation of the case. And when it comes to investigative skills, Simpson team members are no slouches. Joining us now is a man who should know - Criminal Defense lawyer Herald Price Fahringer, who is here to help us explore such tactics. Good morning, Mr. Fahringer. HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER, Criminal Defense Attorney : Good morning. BOB CAIN : We 're hearing so much about the defense 's efforts to portray the police investigation of the case as sloppy, as bungling. Is it not true, though, or likely, that some of this- this missed or bungled evidence really does have at least potential probative value? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Well, that 's possible, Bob. If you think of it in kind of military terms, the first battleground in this case was the police scene. And I believe that confrontation, that battle, was lost by the prosecution, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ established every single fact they have wanted to. The blood on the gate not collected for three weeks. The- the blood on the back of- of Nicole Simpson not preserved. The tracings perhaps under her hand not properly bagged so that- that they would be preserved and secured. The stomach contents, which is a classic way of determining time of death - discarded. All of these are really- inexcusable. They 're failures that- that are indefensible, and you really have n't heard any defense against it. And the evidence that has been lost, the evidence that 's been thrown away, of course, can never be established at trial as some element of the case. So I think they have lost that battle. I think they 're now going to pull back, Bob, to a new battle line, on the alibi defense, and they 're going to take up their position there. BOB CAIN : Is there some point at which, with the accumulation of- of purported police mishandling of the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ mistrial would result? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Oh, I do n't think so. I- I- I- that would be highly unusual and irregular. What could happen, theoretically- it could be so bad that a judge, at the end of the prosecution 's case, might dismiss the prosecution. That 's not going to happen either. What is going to happen is, each and every one of these critical facts will be enlarged into a reasonable doubt. Any one of them, really, in my view, could form the basis of a reasonable doubt, and- and warrant an acquittal in this case. BOB CAIN : Detective Lange yesterday admitted to Johnnie Cochran that he had watched the testimony of another witness on television. Was that, in your view, a violation of the Court 's order to witnesses not to watch other witnesses on TV or make themselves aware of other people 's testimony? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Yes, it was. And it was, really- a very disappointing failure on their @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and not having them see the other testimony of the witnesses, so that you can not, consciously or unconsciously, conform your testimony. That 's been done in our courts for, you know, years. And for him to have breached that is really a- a serious brand of misconduct. BOB CAIN : Why did the defense not make more of it? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Well, I 'm not sure of that. One of things is, of course, that the remedy you would have is is to have his testimony stricken. Judge Ito is not going to do that, and so that it 's a- it 's a violation that obviously is- is one that- that they may comment on at the end of the case, but is not going to have any strong impact on the case. BOB CAIN : They can not ask for some sort of sanctions, as the prosecution- HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : The sanction would be that, in the normal course, when a witness has been @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ remedies is that his testimony is precluded. Is stricken. But that 's not going to happen in this case. Judge Ito 's not going to do that. BOB CAIN : Do you expect huge fireworks when Mark Fuhrman does take the stand? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Bob, I think the major battle looming up in this case - and I mean this - could be Mark Fuhrman. With the fall of Mark Fuhrman could come the fall of the prosecution 's case. That is going to be the lynch pin of this prosecution, because you have to keep in mind, the critical piece of evidence that might implicate O.J. Simpson in this murder, is the glove. If the- the defense is successful in developing this thesis of racial bias- and you 've got to remember, in Los Angeles, most of the minorities there are extremely distrustful, and- and cynical about the police. So he has eight blacks on that jury who are going to be very, very receptive to this theory. If- @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the downfall of the prosecution 's case. BOB CAIN : Is n't real racial bias a hard case to prove, though? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Well, I 'm not so sure they really have to establish it in this trial. It 's going to be used in an impeaching, you know, respect in this case. And- and- and if you have black people who are suspicious of the police, who- who distrust them, who think that they do, you know, engage in this kind of misconduct, they 'll be very receptive that- to that defense, and once again, you know, you 're talking about reasonable doubt. And that 's all they need here. BOB CAIN : Matter of curiosity. I guess it could play into the trial. Can a witness like Lange, who has been testifying, be recalled to the stand after he 's been dismissed, if someone decides they need to ask him something else? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : Absolutely. There's- you know, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ CAIN : By either side? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : I beg your pardon? BOB CAIN : By either side? HERALD PRICE FAHRINGER : By either side. Easily. Of course, the defense would have an absolute right to call him as their witness, to develop what facts they want to develop. The- even the prosecution, if establishing a- a good enough purpose, they could call him back to develop some additional facts. BOB CAIN : Herald Price Fahringer, thank you for joining us again, and for shedding some light. We well appreciate your help.. 
