248041 SUSAN STAMBERG, Host : From National Public Radio in Washington, D.C., this is Weekend Edition. I 'm Susan Stamberg. It may seem a little late, but yet another presidential candidate may be throwing his hat in the ring. Of course, Mikhail Gorbachev was n't expected to do well in the Iowa caucuses anyway. The former leader of the Soviet Union this week played footsy with the prospect of competing in Russia 's presidential election in June, saying he wants to run, but shying away from a formal announcement. Gorby insists he can win the hearts of Russian voters, he 's well-respected in the West as the man who brought us glasnost, but his numbers are way down on the home front. This is Weekend Edition ; I 'm Susan Stamberg in for Scott Simon. MADELINE ALBRIGHT, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations : I was struck by the joy of these pilots in committing cold-blooded murder, and their use of common vulgarity to describe what they needed to shoot down unarmed civilians. Frankly, this is not cajones, this @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Ambassador Madeline Albright condemning Cuba this week for shooting down two unarmed planes of a Cuban exile group, killing four. The event put U.S.-Cuba relations in the headlines for days. Here to discuss this and other happenings of the week, Weekend Edition senior news analyst Daniel Schorr. Good morning, are you up for some civilized discourse this morning? DANIEL SCHORR, News Analyst : Good morning, Susan. With you I could conceive of nothing else but civilized discourse. SUSAN STAMBERG : Well, let 's talk about Cuba. We have memorial protests at sea today in the waters off Cuba, the U.S. setting rules about anti-Castro activities, especially saying that there is going to be no going into, or over, Cuban territorial waters, but can the Coast Guard keep everything under control? DANIEL SCHORR : Oh, I imagine they can. I think what they always needed was to have rules that were clear. The United States said no, it will not tolerate an attack on the boats in international @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ territorial waters, and the same for airplanes. What is happening is that the United States is finally applying the Neutrality Act, which forbids hostile action from American soil against a country with which we are not at war, and I 'll tell you, Susan, I imagine that if those rules had been clear and enforced before this time that last Saturday 's tragedy, the shooting down of those two Cessnas, might not have happened. SUSAN STAMBERG : Yes. Well, President Clinton let the Helms-Burton legislation pass this week. These are much tougher sanctions now being put on Cuba, and, in the past though, the president said he would veto that. So why do you think this mind change? DANIEL SCHORR : Mind change? Well, I think the word is expediency, political expediency. You know, when you have Ambassador Madeline Albright, as we just heard, accusing Castro of all this brutality, it behooves a candidate with any hope of winning the electoral votes of Florida to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ president had good reason to oppose one provision of that bill so far, the provision for suits against citizens of third countries, about property expropriated from Cubans ; mind you, expropriated from Cubans who were not, at the time, Americans, and that introduces an irritant into relations with allied and friendly countries. Reminds me of President Reagan 's effort to punish countries involved in building a pipeline for the Soviet Union. It extends our law to other countries. But the president left himself a loophole to postpone the application of that provision for six months at a time. However, it does end, for the time being at least though, the cautious feelers for coexistence with Cuba that the administration was carrying on. SUSAN STAMBERG : So U.S.-Cuba policy headed nowhere, except maybe more muscle? DANIEL SCHORR : Headed into deep freeze. SUSAN STAMBERG : Yeah. Another note from Latin America today. The U.S. yesterday revoked Colombia 's eligibility for most foreign aid. The word was that that government has failed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to sit very well with the Colombians. DANIEL SCHORR : No. Well, that 's a tough call, especially, you know, coming at a time when the administration also certified that Mexico has fully cooperated, which Mexico has not done. There is now the risk that Colombia may stop cooperating with drug control efforts altogether, but to say that Colombia was fully cooperating when President Samper is under accusation of being on a drug lord 's payroll just became manifestly impossible for the U.S. to do. SUSAN STAMBERG : President politics, guess we 've got to deal with them. Republican primaries in South Carolina today. It seems we 're having a winner of the week in this race. What do you expect here? DANIEL SCHORR : Well, you know, I would have thought that at this point in the campaign that there would be more winnowing of the field, but the ability to rebound from defeat, as Steve Forbes so sensationally did in Arizona, is what, I guess, is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Senator Dole favored to win, but, after a somewhat lackluster campaign, he needs a fairly decisive win. And then, Susan, buckle your seatbelt, primaries fast and furious. Eight next Tuesday, New York then, then the South, then California, and, by the end of March- SUSAN STAMBERG : Whew! DANIEL SCHORR : -two-thirds of Republican delegates will all have been chosen, and the Republican nominee may have been chosen, may have, but I think there 's still every possibility that even then none would have what you would call a clear majority, and then people would begin to yearn for the smoke-filled - I guess, now smoke-free - room where the brokers do all the brokering, except all the brokers have gone now. SUSAN STAMBERG : It 's really interesting. Well, the Congress was back this week in session. Whatever happened to all those things they used to talk about before everybody started running for president, Dan? Balanced budgets, welfare reform, Medicare @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Contract With America. Well, I 'll tell you. There were people- effort was made this week to try to get back to negotiations on the balanced budget deal. Speaker Gingrich indicates that that fizzled. Soon we may be back to worrying about a debt ceiling and about continuing stop-gap spending. The proposed governors ' compromise on welfare and Medicaid has run into trouble with the administration. It was wonderful, President Clinton praised the creativity of the governors but, apparently, does n't like what they created. Immigration has run into divisions among Republicans on how far to go in restricting legal immigration. Voters are asking their representative, ' What indeed ever happened to the Contract With America? ' Answer, ' On hold until at least 1997. ' SUSAN STAMBERG : Uh-huh. Meantime, though, there was landmark farm legislation passed this week, the biggest change in farm policy in 60 years. DANIEL SCHORR : Right. Well, you know, this does foresee an end to paying farmers not to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for crops that are grown. This is indeed a historic change, going back to a system that President Roosevelt brought in with the New Deal, but a lot of concessions had to be made to get that bill through. So, you got seven years of fixed payments, even if you do n't grow anything. I guess you can call that the seven fat years. Then the peanut program and the sugar program have been left intact, but, Susan, do n't knock it. This Congress does n't have much other legislative accomplishments to point to. SUSAN STAMBERG : On the legal, ethical, political fronts some events this week. The people are prodding the White House on Whitewater, and the people prodding New Gingrich over his political action committee. Everybody got disappointments this week. DANIEL SCHORR : Well, it was disappointments for those who expected trouble for people, and relief for those who did n't want the trouble. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation decided not to sue the Rose Law @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for work done for the Madison Guaranty, that failed bank owned by a Clinton friend ; and, on the other hand, a federal judge cleared Newt Gingrich 's GOPAC, a political action committee, of having violated federal election laws. So that leaves us only with Whitewater, and Senator Alfonse D'Amato has run up against a Democratic filibuster in his efforts to get an indefinite extension of his Whitewater investigation. Democrats apparently calculated the public is getting bored with Whitewater and they can afford to resist that, which they 're apparently doing, so what they may get is a deal for a definite time extension for a few weeks. SUSAN STAMBERG : Hmmm. We also this week had the march of the TV moguls to the White House, and they came out with ' voluntary ' - and that 's in very heavy quotes - guidelines on the content of sex and violence in various shows. What do you think about that? DANIEL SCHORR : Well, it 's always been in the cards, Susan @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ violence on television than a V-chip is by having a public-spirited media industry that is ready to control these things at the source, and so you saw this astonishing picture of all the television moguls and tycoons gathered at the White House, saying, ' Yes, yes, yes, we will, we will, we 'll get a voluntary code, and we will do that. ' What made, however, the industry suddenly so public-spirited? Well, there was the Communications Bill, which introduced a threat of a V-chip, and the threat of a V-chip that would drive advertisers away from some programs, there was a lot of political pressure, and there is a new spectrum of TV channels that have to be allocated. They wanted to get those, and so the TV tycoons suddenly found themselves public-spirited. SUSAN STAMBERG : Thank you very much. Weekend Edition 's Daniel Schorr.. 
