238541 ALEX CHADWICK, Host : After Bob Dole clinched the Republican presidential nomination, he declared himself anxious to get back to work in the Senate. Mr. Dole said he would use his position as majority leader to define his differences with President Clinton and advance his campaign. But the strategy has proven difficult, with Democrats pushing for a minimum wage hike and Republicans divided over health care reform. NPR 's Elizabeth Arnold reports. ELIZABETH ARNOLD, Reporter : Disarray used to be a word generally reserved for the Democrats, and discipline for the Republicans in Congress. But the situation appears to have reversed, at least temporarily. Whether it 's the result of the majority leader tying to run for president from the floor of the Senate, or a minority determined to keep the White House and win back the Congress, the Democrats have unified, and the GOP is on the defensive. After a rough week, during which time Speaker Newt Gingrich declared the party was in a funk, and other prominent Republicans expressed doubts about Senator Dole as the nominee, Labor Secretary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in even more. ROBERT REICH, Labor Secretary : Now, I do n't normally give advice to Senator Dole and Speaker Gingrich, but let me just say this to both of them - when you are in a hole, stop digging. ELIZABETH ARNOLD : A proposed 90-cents-an-hour hike in the minimum wage, first suggest by the president last year, has rallied congressional Democrats, the White House and organized labor, and is currently plaguing Senator Dole and the GOP. In both the House and Senate, Democrats demand a vote daily on the increase, which is supported by four out of five Americans. GOP leaders are doing their best to avoid a vote on the wage increase, which is opposed by small business, a traditional ally. But it 's becoming increasingly difficult, especially after more than 20 House Republicans broke ranks to support a dollar-an-hour increase. Led by House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt, Democrats are using the issue to portray Republicans as hopelessly out of touch with the working class. RICHARD GEPHARDT @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, the third ranking House Republican, said that while no one can afford to raise a family on $425 sic an hour - and I quote, he said, ' such families do n't really exist. ' What planet, what world are they living on? ELIZABETH ARNOLD : Last night, Senate Democrats tried to delay action on an immigration bill and the budget, demanding that the minimum wage be addressed. Dole has offered a vote sometime in June, but only if other provisions opposed by organized labor are included. Sen. BOB DOLE( R-KS), Senate Majority Leader : We 've waited three years into the Clinton administration for anybody to even mention minimum wage, or at least the president to ever mention minimum wage. Since the action on the Senate floor, the president 's mentioned, I guess, this year, minimum wage 50-some times. So it 's not too difficult to understand the motivation. ELIZABETH ARNOLD : The issue is causing friction within the GOP, but Republicans such as Phil @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ bring about. Sen. PHIL GRAMM( R-TX) : Well, it 's an interesting commentary that they are now tying their political revival to something that anybody who 's got any sense will tell you is just phony. ELIZABETH ARNOLD : But the minimum wage is n't the only issue Democrats are tying their revival to. For example, they see Dole 's insistence on medical savings accounts and a health insurance bill that was unanimously approved by the Senate as another opportunity. Instead of endorsing a measure that will make it easier for people to keep their health coverage when they change jobs, Dole continued to push for a controversial provision that would allow people to set up tax deductible medical savings accounts. To the dismay of many Republicans in the Senate who want to pass incremental health reform, Dole is continuing his fight, despite an almost certain veto by President Clinton if the provision is included. Senator Christopher Dodd, co-chairman of the Democratic National Committee, is visibly pleased with the Republicans ' internal disputes, but @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ between now and November. Sen. CHRISTOPHER DODD( D-CT), Co-Chairman, Democratic National Committee : And so they 've just really painted themselves into a corner, fighting minimum wage increases, fighting the Kennedy-Kassebaum bill to provide health coverage- just one issue after another. They clearly seem to be taking positions that are directly contrary to the interests that the public 's expressing they want this Congress to work on. So I- I 'd love to tell you it 's all because of our wizardry, but most of the trouble that the majority leader is in, he has created for himself. ELIZABETH ARNOLD : Arizona Republican John McCain, who has been advising Senator Dole on his presidential campaign, is optimistic that current battles over the minimum wage and health care will be quickly forgotten. Sen. JOHN McCAIN( R-AZ) : I think that in the fall, people will be concentrating on whether we were able to get a welfare reform bill to the president 's desk, whether we really cut taxes, whether we were @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ American people. I do n't think that this is noticed when people start focusing on the presidential campaign. ELIZABETH ARNOLD : But Congress is already focused on November, and that 's likely to prevent either side from accomplishing much between now and the election. I 'm Elizabeth Arnold at the capitol.. 
