2005941 The abundant wildlife and rich natural history of this exotic archipelago have lured scientists and adventurers for centuries. Photograph Above : Left : Far left : // Looking back on his sojourn in the Galapagos Islands in the mid-19th century, Charles Darwin dubbed this exotic archipelago a " living laboratory of evolution. " A Pacific Ocean province of Ecuador, this group of 13 islands and eight half-square-mile islets straddles the equator 600 miles west of the mainland. Every primordial vista of this sparsely populated archipelago pulses with evidence of the volcanic activity and tectonic crashing that, some four and a half million years ago, thrust these rocky outcroppings 7,000 to 10,000 feet up from the sea floor to heights greater than a mile above sea level. Claimed for Spain by Tomas de Berlanga, Bishop of Panama, in 1535, the island group was known alternately as Las Encantadas( " the Bewitched Isles ") and Insulae de los Galapagos( Old Spanish for " the Islands of the Tortoises ") in the 1570s, when they first appeared on maps. Because they lie in the Humboldt @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, and in the path of the southeastern trade winds, the general climate of the archipelago is marked by low rainfall, low humidity, and low air and water temperatures. Despite their equatorial situation, the islands ' temperatures remain relatively consistent and pleasant throughout the year. I traveled to the Galapagos in late spring and during the course of my 10-day expedition set foot on more than 20 islands. My companions and I traveled by ship, the only means of group transport that allows meaningful exploration of these geological outposts. Our vessel was the sleek black-hulled Alta, a trimasted, 140-foot luxury schooner that was elegantly outfitted from stem to stem. While leafing through a book in the Alta 's library, I came across an observation that Darwin had noted during his five-week exploration of this intriguing chain in 1835 : By far, the most remarkable feature in the natural history of this archipelago is that the different islands to a considerable extent are inhabited by a different set of beings. We never dreamed that islands, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ them in sight of each other formed of precisely the same rocks, placed under a quite similar climate, rising to a nearly equal height, would have been differently tenanted.... // Area of Detail // It was the " different set of beings " he studied on the Galapagos that encouraged Darwin 's pursuit of his theories of evolution and natural selection. These unusual inhabitants continue to make the Galapagos Islands fascinating-as we discovered on our first foray to South Plaza Island. Meeting the " Locals " Donning bright-orange life jackets, we piled into the Alta 's two pangas, the motorized rubber dinghies that ferry visitors back and forth from the ship to the islands. Scores of sea lions basking on the beach barked raucously as we disembarked at a makeshift dock and inched past them. Black mottled land iguanas, mouths drawn back into tight reptilian grimaces, reposed in the shade of spiky opuntia cactus. Vivid-red Sally Lightfoot crabs sidled over the slick black rocks that separate the marine from the terrestrial environment. I stepped gingerly over @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ twitching mound of eight-inch-long land iguanas. Though I was near enough to feel the spray these miniature dinosaurs exhale as they expel the salt that builds up in their system, they took no notice of me. Continuing along the trail, I inched past a group of sea lions so near they could have tickled me with their whiskers. A mockingbird alighted on another hiker 's fanny pack and proceeded to snoop for a snack. Because the animal species here existed for millennia without encountering humankind, they never evolved a fear of us, which makes getting close to them easy-perhaps overly so, for their sakes. From steep cliffs overlooking the vast stretch of the Pacific and other islands in the archipelago, we spied blue-footed boobies-seabirds that ride thermals until they locate fish near the water 's surface, at which point they plunge-dive in a flash to feed. Swallow-tailed gulls soared from nest to sea to sky and back again. Below, white-tipped sharks and schools of long, yellow mullet gleamed faintly just below the water 's @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ pulled on the long tail feathers of fleeing red-billed tropicbirds, forcing them to disgorge their well-earned suppers while the interlopers swooped down to gobble up-in midairthe abandoned victuals. Finches grazed on the mites and ticks that infest the iguanas ' rippled, leathery skin. And every now and then a sea lion slid off the rocks into the water in pursuit of a marine morsel. The Tortoises ' Plight Sailing through the night, we arrived at Santa Cruz Island, home to the Charles Darwin Research Station and its tortoiseconservation pens. Efforts to snatch the tortoise from the maw of extinction illustrate the difficulty of conserving the archipelago 's natural resources in their pristine state. Three races of these lumbering reptiles, which can weigh up to 500 pounds and live for 200 years, were eradicated by early sailors ; several other tortoise populations have also been devastated by nonnative animals that early settlers introduced to the islands over the centuries. Fortunately, a breeding program managed by the station is keeping the captive Geochelone elephantopus, the giant Galapagos tortoise @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ baby tortoises to prepare them for their eventual return to the wild. Scientists are optimistic about the fate of most of the archipelago 's tortoises, save Lonesome George, the station 's most famous full-sized inhabitant and the last remaining member of his particular subspecies. With no potential mate in sight, George seems destined to suffer the fate of his predecessors. Continuing our clockwise navigation, we headed to Espanola( Hood) Island, the southernmost island in the Galapagos chain. Led by Reyna Oleas, an Ecuadorian naturalist and guide, we set off on a chalky trail that twisted up cliffs to the breeding grounds of masked boobies and swallow-tailed gulls. Treading carefully to avoid both the shallow ground scrapings that pass for nests and the soft, downy chicks peeping out from under their mothers ' feathers, we soon arrived at an open, rocky area that serves as a " runway " for droves of waved albatrosses. Espanola Island is the world 's only nesting ground for these ivory-hued, turkey-sized birds. In fact, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ some 10,000 breeding pairs flock to the island. After leaving their nests, fledgling albatrosses will remain at sea for five years or more, which makes for some frustrating and seemingly antic landing attempts when they finally return to the runway. Kayaking and Snorkeling Though much of a Galapagos expedition revolves around hiking, sea kayaking and snorkeling reveal abundant island riches as well. In fact, quiet kayaks are far superior to a noisy panga for slipping up on the rotund sea turtles that inhabit many of the islands ' lagoons. Among the archipelago 's many snorkeling spots, Santa Maria Island 's Devil 's Crown ranks high. This crescent-shaped, underwater volcanic cone is a marine playground for schools of iridescent fishes, occasional sharks, immense urchins, and elaborately colored Moorish idolsskinny reef fish taller than they are long that have a pronounced dorsal fm. Several of us played chase with the impish sea lions attracted to our air bubbles. No one, however, can match the sea 's true aquanauts. Another part of our expedition @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ crest of Sierra Negra( Black Mountain), whose caldera-at four to six miles across-is the largest in the island group.( Calderas are craters formed when volcanoes collapse ; the calderas in the Galapagos are not only huge but sometimes form mountaintop lakes.) But expansive views from the caldera 's rim were n't our ultimate pursuit. Picking our way on foot across a rugged lava field, we came to Sierra Negra 's extraordinary fumaroles, deep geological escape valves that release sulfur-laden steam into the open air to ward off the eruption of what islanders refer to as " devil fire. " Yet another excursion took us to Genovesa( Tower) Island, mating and nesting grounds of the magnificent frigatebird. Courtship among these tropical seabirds is a rather elaborate ritual during which the male frigates, bright-red gular sacks dangling beneath their bill, indulge in the primping. During mating season, the male seeks out a suitable spot for a nest and upon finding one, lands, struts around, then puffs up his red sack @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ spreads his wings, flutters wildly, and calls up to the females flying overhead. With dozens of flashy displays to assess, a female will eventually find a particular nesting location-and the size and color of the nesting male 's sackpreferable to others. After she has made her choice and descended, the male drapes a wing around her and they mate. By comparison, masked, or white, boobies court without much pomp. After the male and female land, they offer each other bits of twigs and brush for the nest they 'll eventually build. In rapid-fire motion, they clack their beaks together, preen and ruffle one another 's feathers, and rub their long red beaks up and down each other 's necks, all to the music they themselves provide, the female honking in response to the male 's whistle. An Evolved Viewpoint On the eve of our departure from the Galapagos Islands, I decided to sneak in a pre-supper swim. Diving off the Alta 's stem, I stroked 100 yards out @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ waters. Several avian laggards were winging their way back to their island roosts, serenaded by the distant bellowing of a bull sea lion calling his harem to shore. As a twilight breeze brushed against our fine galleon 's sails, the first star twinkled to life in the darkening sky. Having come to the " Enchanted Islands " in part to put some of Darwin 's theories to the test of my own observation, I was taking home an unexpectedly evolved appreciation for the natural world and the purposeful, often amusing, behavior of its wildlife. IA Author Affiliation Freelance writer Diane MacEachern is based in Washington, D.C. // <p> 
