4028141 Though we Americans often vote our fears, we should ignore the Cowardly Lions within us and elect lawmakers who demonstrate more brains and heart. // WATCHING THE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES chase one another back and forth across the country on the longest and most confusing campaign trail in modern history reminds me of The Wizard of Oz. Candidates are trying to find enough yellow bricks to keep their campaign coffers full, and those trying to follow the race feel as lost and confused as Dorothy and Toto. We know we 're not in Kansas, but we 're not sure where we are. Unlike Dorothy, however, our presidential campaigns are usually missing a Scarecrow and Tin Man, since few American pundits or voters seem to be in search of a candidate with a heart or a brain. Every four years the American press and public hits the campaign trail like a pride of Cowardly Lions, hoping we 'll find a leader who has " courage. " And every election cycle we turn and run from any candidate accused of being " soft "( or chicken) on @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, he or she may be really smart and accomplished, have a great record, be full of compassion, and might make a great president- " If they only had the ' noive. ' " But somebody called them a scaredycat, and voters scattered like jackals. Why, much more than brains or heart, do we want our leaders to have " guts " -to be tough? Why does American politics so often feel like a high school popularity contest? We ca n't elect the smart candidate-she 's a geek. We ca n't vote for the compassionate candidate-he 's a sissy. So we start lionizing the bully-he 's so tough. MAYBE WE CHASE AFTER CANDIDATES PROMising to be tough on everything because we live in a society where we are always being told how dangerous our neighborhood and world are. In Following Jesus in a Culture of Fear( Brazos, 2007), Scott Bader-Saye reports that our marketers, leaders, and media use fear all the time to scare us into buying their products, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ media and Madison Avenue regularly exaggerate the proximity and size of threats to our health, safety, and security to generate more customers and larger audiences. Politicians of both parties fuel our fears of crime, drugs, and terrorism to gain votes. Keeping customers and citizens scared is good for business and politics. Fear-mongering reached a fever pitch in the wake of 9/11. The White House claimed a mad man in league with the terrorists who flew into the World Trade Center had amassed weapons of mass destruction, then terrified us with images of a mushroom cloud over a U.S. city. How could we not launch a war against such a villain? The FBI reported that thousands of terrorist cells were hidden in our towns and neighborhoods. What use were our civil liberties and constitutional rights when facing such a threat? And Homeland security permanently set the warning level at orange, even years after the last attack and in places no self-respecting terrorist would go. How could we ever feel safe again? BUT CRYING WOLF WAS @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and pundits scaring citizens into rash campaigns and wars is nothing new. Historians David Musto and John Heller argue that since the 1880s Americans have been frightened into waging at least five unnecessary and useless wars on drugs and crime. In every case these wars were the result of fear-mongering about some ethnic or minority group that was seen as posing a threat to the economic status quo. There were always well-to-do Americans using drugs, but no one ever waged a war against them. In Overblown : How Politicians and the Terrorism Industry Inflate National Security Threats( Free Press, 2006), J. E. Mueller makes a strong case that since World War II the federal government and our intelligence agencies have chronically exaggerated the threats posed by other nations and groups. We saw proof enough of this when the president continued to exaggerate the threat of Iran 's nuclear program even after his own intelligence agency had discounted the danger. Keeping citizens scared has become part of the business of government. Indeed, terrifying the citizenry into waging senseless @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ When a new pharaoh wanted to secure his grip over the Egyptians, he manufactured lies about the dangers posed by the Hebrews, frightening the population into a war against people who had lived among them for years. Jesus, who lived in a very dangerous time and place, told his disciples to " be not afraid. " American Christians need to take that direction to heart. We need to stop worshiping safety and security and face the fact that life is full of risks. We are all frail and mortal human beings, and no president with his finger on the world 's largest arsenal is going to protect us from those risks. No tough guy is going to ride into town and wipe out evil or destroy all our enemies. The simple truth is that we can not conquer our fears by scaring everybody else. ON THE YELLOW BRICK ROAD TO THE WHITE House we need more Tin Men and Scarecrows, candidates with brains and hearts. Hoping to find a leader with " noive " may be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ sounding false alarms. But it is a fool 's errand. Zealots and terrorists are people who have too much " noive " and not enough brains and heart. And most of the trouble we find ourselves in today as a nation did not happen because we had too little " noive " but because our intelligence and compassion failed us. So the next time you hear a politician telling you he or she will be tough on the dangers lurking outside, check to see if the candidate comes with an equal portion of brains and heart. Author Affiliation By PATRICK MCCORMICK, professor of Christian ethics at Gonzaga University in Spokane, Washington. // 
