2014141 Like an old-time preacher, David Sloan Wilson has the appearance of a man with mission. An evolutionary biologist at the State University of New York at Binghamton, Wilson is given to marching up and down, flailing his arms, and proclaiming passionately, even in informal conversation. His message is as clear as it is bold : A whole generation of evolutionary biologists has been misled into believing that natural selection grinds inexorably at the level of individual interests, and only at that level. Instead, Wilson argues, biologists must recognize that groups of organisms have evolutionary interests, too, and that natural selection sometimes operates at this " higher " level. " Group selection " means that, occasionally, individuals within a group -- for instance, an ant colony, a baboon troop, a nomadic band of human hunter-gatherers, or even a human population united by a common culture -- may sacrifice their own reproductive future if, by doing so, the group benefits This benefit comes through increased fitness, that is, through contributing more offspring to the next generation than @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ cooperate if the common end enhances the group 's fitness. For more than twenty years, Wilson has been working unceasingly -- initially very much as a loner, but now with a growing band of supporters -- advocating a theory that has been viewed by some as nothing less than heretical. Although much of his writing is couched in the arcane language of mathematical models, Wilson is concerned with a form of behavior that is very basic and, intuitively anyway, easily understood : altruism. Humans may pride themselves on being genuinely altruistic, selflessly helping others, whether it is by dying for one 's country or giving a couple of dollars to homeless person on the street. But, modern evolutionary biologists ask, can animals other than humans be described a sometimes acting altruistically? Is the honeybee that dies in the act of stinging an intruder to the hive being altruistic? And what of a lioness that suckles the young of others in the pride as well as her own? Humans think of altruism as doing good @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ deny such motives to other animals. Two decades ago, Harvard biologist Edward O. Wilson proclaimed in his important and controversial book Sociobiology : The New Synthesis that altruism is " the central theoretical problem " of evolutionary biology in a social context. Darwin was aware of apparently altruistic behaviors in nature. His theory of evolution by natural selection is principal about the survival of individuals in the " struggle for existence, " in which they a always seeking ways of promoting the own reproductive success. Nevertheless he recognized that individuals might sometimes act selflessly if, as a result, the success of the group is promoted instead. In The Descent of Man, Darwin used this line of argument to explain the evolution of morality. If this sounds uncannily like David Sloan Wilson 's position, it is. So why has Wilson been called a heretic for championing something that Darwin expressed a century ago? How is it, as Wilson recently noted, that " the rejection of group selection was treated as a scientific advance comparable to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ was kept alive as an example how not to think? " During the century following the publication of The Descent of Man, Darwin 's clear vision of group selection was superseded by a fuzzy view of life as a harmonious enterprise, with individuals acting toward a collective good. Most scientists, for instance, saw territoriality as individuals acting to control the density of the population for the good of all. Similarly, dominance hierarchies -- the pecking orders so common among social animals -- were seen as a means of reducing wasteful conflicts within the group. This naive version of group selection culminated in the 1962 publication of V.C. Wynne-Edwards 's classic book, Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour. Wynne-Edwards proposed that attributes of all social groups were subject to the forces of natural selection. His book was the target of immediate and blistering attack, for by then a new generation of evolutionary biologists had arisen. These scientists, building on a foundation of mathematical population genetics that increasingly emphasized the importance of individual selection, demolished @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ among the opponents was George C. Williams, of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, who took on group selection in his 1966 book Adaptation and Natural Selection. Williams argued that, although a theoretical possibility, selection at the level of the group was an insignificant evolutionary force compared with individual selection. One reason was that the rate of evolution is far higher at the level of the individual than at that of the group ; another was that, for the most part, groups are rather fluid, with members often moving between them, thus diluting the group as an evolving entity. Moreover, a group of altruists could easily be exploited by a sneakily selfish individual bent on boosting its own reproductive output at the expense of others holding back for the sake of the group. If group selection were important, reasoned Williams, we would expect populations of sexually reproducing species to contain more females than males. This is because the number of reproductively active females -- not the number of males -- ultimately @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, in evolutionary terms, the more successfully reared offspring there are in a group, the more successful that group is. Under individual selection, an even sex ratio is predicted( as a result of a balance in the struggle by individuals to maximize their own reproductive success through their offspring). And, Williams observed, an even ratio of males to females is what is most often seen in the world. With the publication of The Selfish Gene in 1976, Oxford University biologist Richard Dawkins moved the focus of natural selection even further away from the group. For Dawkins, it is not just individuals but the genes within them that matter. More ammunition against group selection came with the development of kin selection and game theory, mathematical models that were designed to explain altruism and cooperative behavior. The theory of kin selection has deep roots, going back principally to the insights of another Oxford biologist, William Hamilton, and fellow Brit John Maynard Smith, of the University of Sussex. Maynard Smith and Hamilton @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ measure of its reproductive opportunity to enhance that of another, the donor -- or at least some of its genes -- may actually benefit if it is a relative of the recipient of the favor. Game theory( originally a method developed by mathematicians to examine economic cooperation and conflict among humans) showed that even unrelated individuals cooperate while looking to their own interests. Robert Trivers, then at Harvard University, used this approach in developing the notion of reciprocal altruism, or " I 'll scratch your back now because you scratched mine a while ago and I expect you to scratch mine again. " The era of the individual in evolutionary biology was thus firmly established and was apparently unassailable. Ethologists entered field studies confident that this theoretical perspective would powerfully inform what they would observe, particularly among primate species. " It 's true. It was powerful, " says Barbara Smuts, a primatologist at the University of Michigan, who has studied chimpanzees and baboons in East Africa. " But sometimes you had to stretch @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, she doubted that a short-term, narrow view of self-interests could explain some features of alliances between males and females, because even after a long period of devotion to a female, a male has no guarantee that he will enjoy her mating favors in the future. Like many others, though, Smuts says, " I just thought that when I had more data it would be okay. I never thought bout group selection.... No one did. " Frans de Waal, of the Yerkes Primate Center in Atlanta, recalls someone once describing a primate society as being like a transparent organism. " It was a powerful metaphor, " he now says, " thinking of the group as an organism. But we were n't allowed to talk like that A generation of field researchers felt the same : most accepted that group selection was discredited, and a few nursed curiosity about it but kept quiet for fear of appearing intellectually unsound. Meanwhile, David Sloan Wilson had been laboring at his theoretical last since the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ believed eschewed the naivete of earlier models. Wilson argues that the fundamental issue is the " vehicle " of selection. An individual, for instance, consists of a population of cells, but insofar as those cells share a common fate, in an evolutionary sense, the individual -- and not the cells -- is properly seen as the vehicle of selection. Similarly, a long-term alliance, or friendship, between a male and female baboon can be considered a vehicle because they share a common fate in the reproductive success that stems from the alliance. The female members of a pride of lions may also be a vehicle because their fitness depends on the fitness of their group, in terms of hunting success and protection against outside attack. An entire social group of vervet monkeys, for instance, may be a vehicle in their joint foraging and defense. Group selection works, Wilson says, when groups are competing but not when they are in isolation. Suppose an individual within an isolated group provisions the offspring of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ fitness. Even though the overall fitness of the group is enhanced, the behavior will not be selected because it is not to the advantage of the individual doing it. However, Wilson argues, if the group is in competition with other such groups, the behavior will be selected because the group as a whole has an advantage relative to other groups. One of the most persuasive examples of group selection in nature, argues Wilson, is the evolution of virulence in parasites. It is in a parasite 's Darwinian interest to reproduce as bountifully as is compatible with high transmission to other hosts. A strain that multiplies too fast may rapidly kill off its host, thereby reducing its chances of transmission to other hosts. Imagine two mice, each infected with a different strain of a certain parasite. Multiplying rapidly, the more virulent strain will have greater reproductive success than the less virulent one. Because its host-mouse soon expires, however, transmission to other mice will be lower than that of the less virulent parasite @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ but lower virulence between them. " If group selection were a negligible force in disease evolution, then parasites would evolve to maximize their virulence and the notion of optimal virulence would be irrelevant, " observe David Wilson and University of Wisconsin philosopher Elliot Sober. Further support for group selection comes from the group behavior of social insects and the discovery of female-biased sex ratios in a variety of organisms, including fig wasps, hummingbird flower mites, and social spiders. The main body of evolutionary biologists, however, remains convinced that individual-level selection is the key to understanding social organization and behavior and rejects group selection as wrongheaded thinking. Dawkins is blunt in his response to Wilson 's version of group selection, writing recently that he is " baffled by... the sheer, wanton, head-in-bag perversity of the position. " Williams points out that from his calculations and observations, group selection occupies only a tiny corner of the world of evolution. " It 's not a matter of logical correctness, " he says. " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ overstates the importance of group selection. " Maynard Smith is critical of Wilson for causing " more confusion than clarity by using the term group selection in many different ways, " but he also praises him for being " one of the few who has made the subject interesting again. " Meanwhile, Wilson is making converts. " My resistance crumbled immediately, as soon as I saw what he was saying, " recalls Smuts, who was witness to one of Wilson 's informal, passionate expositions at a 1994 gathering of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society. " The logic of the vehicle of selection, at different levels, is very persuasive. " She was particularly drawn to the shifts in focus from within-group competition to within-group cooperation that might occur for an individual at different times and under different circumstances, particularly in intelligent species. " Male chimpanzees are a good example, " Smuts explains. " At any time, the community might be challenged by another group, so that individual interest in competing with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in favor of collective group protection. " De Waal finds himself sympathetic to group selection but is still waiting to see how it might be a more powerful explanatory perspective than individual selection. He recently published Good Natured, a book on the evolution of morality in human and nonhuman primates. " Human morality is a classic case of something imposed on individuals for the well-being of the community, " he explains. " Individuals benefit from a strong, united community, and that is why the community is valued so highly in our moral system. " This might be seen as an example of what some anthropologists call cultural group selection. Like humans, de Waal says, chimpanzees appear to value harmony in their social group. When peace is disrupted, often by bouts between competing males, a female acting as mediator may bring the two males together -- sometimes diffusing the rising tension, sometimes effecting a reconciliation after an all-out fight. For instance, she might begin grooming one of the combatants, gradually luring him @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ drawn together, she will use her considerable, subtle social skills to get the two males to groom each other. Such intervention is a tricky and sometimes risky business. " It is a striking example of an individual taking care of relationships in which the mediator is not herself directly involved, " observes de Waal. " This is what moral systems do all the time. " Nevertheless, de Waal sees such cases of rudimentary morality " as an outcome of individual-level selection because the female benefits from a harmonious social context. " Can human morality also be viewed as a result of individual-level selection, although expressed more generally and with more force because of language? " I suspect there is an interplay between individual and group selection in primate social systems, " de Waal speculates, " but we have n't worked out what it is yet. " Anthropologists are deeply split over the place of group selection in human society. Some, such as Christopher Boehm of the University of Southern California, believe it has @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ societies. " The egalitarian social structure you see in a foraging society is the result of the group 's preventing its leaders from becoming dominant, " argues Boehm. Richard Alexander, of the University of Michigan, points out that nobody " knows if group selection has been important in determining the genetic makeup of modern humans.... If it has been important, it has likely involved direct intergroup competition and hostility of the sort we 've seen all across history. " The foray into the human realm inevitably muddies the waters of the group selection debate because of the thick overlay of culture. When one anthropologist points out that humans readily die for their country, supposedly demonstrating altruism for the good of the group, another reminds us that it is usually the poor who fight wars for the benefit of the rich and that if the poor choose not to fight, they may be flung in jail. Moreover, recent studies reveal that a person is much more likely to, say, give money to beggars when accompanied @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @) than when alone. The motive here seems to be to enhance the social standing of the giver. Donald Campbell, of Lehigh University, speaks for many when he says he expects there is a biological underpinning to many aspects of human social behavior as a result of group selection. An admirer of Wilson and Sober 's work, he is disappointed that their arguments do n't yet illuminate the way. He would like to see group selection in the human realm made " more explicitly plausible. " Finally, the sociological dimension of the group selection debate can not be ignored, as psychiatrist Randolph Nesse, of the University of Michigan, observes. " It 's not surprising that Wilson and Sober want to see human altruism as the result of group selection, " he says. " Many people do. The discovery that some altruism is n't genuinely altruistic but is instead fundamentally selfish is deeply disturbing. Some would find comfort if we were able to reconcile our moral feelings with biological reality, but unfortunately it @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ have to accept this reality and not seek to change the science to suit our feelings. Not surprisingly, Wilson rejects this line of argument. " One of the great insights that is going to come out of group selection is that morality will be justified at face value, " he says. " That is, it 's a system designed to benefit the common good. But, you should n't think I 'm a hopeless romantic, because a lot of nasty things are the result of group selection as well, including the ability to inflict genocide. " <p> 
