2012541 It becomes part of the ritual of every well - baby visit : the baby is weighed and measured and the numbers are carefully recorded on a growth chart. Recording the baby 's growth is important because a drastic variation from normal, or a sudden change in the baby 's previous pattern, can be a signal of some significant medical problems. But parents -- especially breastfeeding mothers -- sometimes become unnecessarily anxious about weight gains that seem unusually fast or slow, even when the baby is otherwise healthy. On average, a baby will double her birth weight at about five months and triple it at one year.( The average is roughly seven pounds at birth, 14 pounds at five months, and 21 pounds at one year. To convert from pounds to kilograms : 1 lb. = 0.45 kg.) The normal range of weight gain is between four and eight ounces per week for the first six months, slowing to between three and five ounces per week for the rest of the first year. Lactation consultant Deanna Rattmann emphasizes that these figures are averages @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ either side of the average. " Your baby 's pattern of growth may not fit the charts( for example, some babies gain weight more evenly throughout the entire year), but it may be exactly right for him. Rattmann points out that the growth charts used by most physicians were developed using primarily formula - fed babies( they are distributed free to the doctors by the formula manufacturers). " We know that breastfed babies have a different pattern of growth, and they may not conform to the charts because of that. We really need to have some charts specifically for breastfed infants. " Even if those charts were developed, individual babies would show deviations from the norm. Rattmann encourages parents to consider other signs of growth and development, rather than focusing entirely on where the baby fits on a particular chart. They should also consider how the baby 's body length is growing, how his head circumference is growing, whether his skin and general appearance is good, whether he is generally happy @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ bowel movements and wet diapers, " she says. " If the baby is doing well in all these areas, the low weight gain is probably not significant. " Rattmann also points out the importance of considering the baby 's genetic background. She remembers one case she was asked to assist with, where a breastfed baby girl weighed only 13 pounds at one year of age. Rattmann first spoke to the mother over the phone, and learned that the baby 's health seemed otherwise good. When she finally met the little girl and her parents, though, it was all she could do not to laugh. The mother was about 4 ' ' 10 ", fine - boned, and very slender ; the father was about 5 ' ' 1 " and just as slight in build. Their daughter, although definitely smaller than average, fit perfectly into that family. These genetic differences are also important when considering babies from various ethnic, racial and even regional groups. Because the charts currently in use @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with a population of primarily European heritage, babies of( for example) Japanese or Korean heritage often seem to be comparatively slow - gaining. Parents of babies whose weights go off the top of the chart can also become concerned. Deanna Rattmann 's son Peter was born weighing nine lbs., 13 oz. and weighed over 19 lbs. at age two months. He was totally breastfed, and continued to gain weight at this rate until after he was six months old( Rattmann remembers her friends calling him " The Little Buddha. ' ') Their family physician expressed concern that Peter might have a metabolic disorder that was causing this rapid weight gain, and had a paediatrician examine him. Peter, however, was quite healthy, and has grown into a child who is tall and husky -- just like his parents. Rattmann explains that the fast - gaining breastfed baby is rarely a concern. " We know that the fat of breastfed babies is different from that of babies fed formula. Babies who are @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ be obese as adults, even if they gain weight very quickly in their first year. " When breastfed babies are gaining too slowly, the tendency is to blame the problem on breastfeeding, and quickly switch to formula - feeding. Rattmann suggests that other steps can be taken to improve the situation. If medical problems have been ruled out, the mother should pay close attention to how the baby is nursing. Is the baby well latched on to the breast, with the nipple well back in his mouth? Is he dropping his jaw well down as he sucks, with only short pauses, and can you hear swallowing? Is he nursing long enough at the first breast to get the fat - rich hindmilk?( Rattmann recommends letting the baby come off the breast on his own rather than timed feedings.) Has the mother been delaying feedings by using a pacifier, or offering water( which has no calories)? If these problems can be solved, often the weight gain will improve. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with formula( using a cup or lactation aid) rather than weaning altogether. Just as adults come in all shapes and sizes, so do babies. Remember that growth charts are about averages, " Rattmann says. " There have to be some babies who are at the top or bottom of the charts, or who gain at a different rate. Fitting into the chart is n't important -- having a healthy baby who shows steady gains in all areas of growth and development is. " <p> 
