4075541 In the Catholic Church the question of women priests( and by implication women bishops) was put to rest with two modern documents. One is the 1976 Inter Insigniores( Declaration on the Question of Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood) by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. The second, Ordinatio Sacerdotalis( On Reserving Priestly Ordination to Men Alone), is a 1994 apostolic letter from Pope John Paul II to the world 's bishops. Both teach that the church does not believe it has the authority to ordain women to priesthood. However, each leaves aside the question of ordaining women as deacons. Church history includes many women deacons, although history does n't settle the argument. Ordained women deacons in the early church do not prove that the church needs ordained women deacons today. However, neither would a lack of ordained women deacons in the past toll the final bell against restoring a clearly historical ministry of women. Many women called " deacon " in the early church ministered in various ways in different territories across the centuries. The @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ whom St. Paul calls a " deacon of the church at Cenchrae "( Rom. 16:1). While specialists translate scripture in different ways, Paul definitely uses the title deacon for Phoebe. In Romans and again in First Timothy( 3:11), we find the greatest scriptural support for women deacons. The word diakonos appears 29 times in 27 different verses in the New Testament and is translated variously as " servant, " " minister, " or " deacon " depending on the context. Language is always a problem when considering ancient sources. Were the early women named in scripture " servants " or " ministers " or " deacons "? Bishops of the early church named many women " deacons " or, in some territories, " deaconesses. " The women " served " and performed " ministry. " The evidence flips back and forth. Some writers today call the women deacons of the early church " deaconesses, " even where ancient literary or epigraphical( tombstone) references specifically call them " deacons @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ except that a ministry of service identified with the word diakonia was somehow extended to women. Some argue that the women called " deaconesses " were the wives of deacons. Others argue they belonged to a fourth, minor order ranked between deacons and subdeacons. Still others argue that the titles deacon and deaconess are interchangeable and neither prove nor disprove anything about these women 's status in the early church. Where does that leave us now? The modem rebirth of the permanent diaconate began in 1951 when several young social workers who hoped to become married permanent deacons to serve the needy formed a group in Freiburg, Germany. The permanent diaconate has grown to an order of 35,000 men worldwide, most of whom are married. In the fall of 2009, the Catholic Church in Ireland began training its first group of candidates for the permanent diaconate. The permanent diaconate is most developed in the West, with about 16,000 permanent deacons in the United States alone. But about a year ago eight married men were ordained in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, India. But what about women deacons? The church has long enjoyed the ministry of women who performed the traditional diaconal tasks of catechesis, ministering to the sick, and assisting the poor. In modern times these tasks were undertaken mostly by women religious, who built Catholic health care and education in the United States and who still provide the backbone personnel for thousands of social service ministries. But these women ministers are laypeople, not clerics, and are not part of the hierarchical structure of the church. They can not preach. They can not baptize except in an emergency. They can not witness marriages. Yet, as their numbers decline, these women religious seem to be living and ministering more like today 's deacons without being ordained. Increasingly young women see a two-tiered system at play and are not willing to give up their fives to a second-class status that seems frozen in place. So rather than emulate the virgins and widows of the early church, some of whom became deacons, young women @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of living their baptismal promises, and volunteering or working professionally in the church as they can. But what keeps any of these women - religious, single, or married - from being ordained deacons? If We look at today 's diaconal minis tries, there is none an ordained woman deacon could not perform. Charged at ordination to serve " the Word, the liturgy, and charity, " the deacon is the icon of Christ, but not the icon of Christ-priest. Rather, the deacon models the servant-Christ. Except for service in the liturgy, most diaconal ministries - works of charity- are more clearly associated with women in church history. While there are numerous ancient documents discussing women deacons - at what age they are ordained, how the ordination liturgies are to be carried out, regulations about their lifestyle - the modern church has not fully decided about women deacons. In late 2002 the Vatican 's International Theological Commission completed a short document on the diaconate. It did not rule out women as deacons @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ reasons for excluding women from priesthood : Jesus chose male apostles( an argument from authority) and only a male may represent Christ as priest( the " iconic argument "). These do not apply to the diaconate. The 1976 document on women priests includes the " iconic argument " but only applies it to priesthood. The 1994 document on priesthood drops the argument altogether. If the matter of women priests is settled, then the " slippery slope " argument that ordaining women as deacons is a stepping stone to women priests is specious. The real question is whether the church needs ordained women deacons. What can women deacons add? It is fair to say they would add a lot. The suffering church will continue to suffer. Women will continue to serve the poor and the needy, whether as women religious or as lay ecclesial ministers. The charge of the deacon is the intertwined ministry of " the Word, the liturgy, and charity. " By sacramentally ordaining women whose ministry already is one @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ strengthening and empowering them and their ministries. More closely connecting women to the hierarchical church 's works of charity might give women more say about the use of church funds and property. Deacons in the early church received the gifts as the people came to Mass. Some of these gifts - bread and wine - became the eucharistie banquet. Some provided for the needs of the priests. But the bulk of the gifts went to the poor. Women today accept the church 's " preferential option for the poor " made famous by the Catholic bishops of Latin America in the mid-1970s. The diaconal charge of charity also means visiting the sick and imprisoned, helping the homeless and friendless, and otherwise providing the means to a better life - especially through education and training. Deacons are stewards of the Word and their traditional ministry includes catechesis. That extends to preparing people for sacraments and personal involvement with the Word of God, which deacons encounter daily through scripture study, praying the Liturgy of Hours, and personal prayer @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ prayer and scripture. Perhaps the biggest visual difference the church would experience with women deacons is in the liturgy. Women deacons could preside at the public celebration of the Liturgy of Hours, and, like the abbesses of old( and of today), impart the blessing at its end. Women deacons, like men deacons, could be granted faculties to witness marriages and to baptize. They could lead funeral services and impart the church 's blessing on the deceased. Formal eucharistie liturgies have two deacons : the deacon of the Word and the deacon of the cup. Women deacons could assist in preparation of the gifts, proclaim the gospel, and formally preach. If women deacons were stewards of church funds for the poor, maintained responsibility for catechesis, and continued their historical ministries to the sick and the lonely, their Sunday preaching would bring the gospel full circle. They would give voice to the gospel message they live. No one knows if or when the Catholic Church will move in this direction. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to restore the female diaconate. Among them, Cardinal Carlo M. Martini, retired archbishop of Milan, called for women deacons at the 1999 European Bishops ' Synod. And Bishop Roger J. Vangheluwe of Bruges, Belgium asked the pope for women deacons during his 2003 ad limina meeting. Will it happen? Should it happen? Only time will tell, but it is certain that a conversation is already under way. 
