4027641 Meet the women who bring their keen insights -- not to mention their array of glittering goods -- to this month 's Paris Biennale des Antiquaires. EDITED BY SARAH MEDFORD PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEXANDRE BAIHACHE IN THE ARENA of haute antiques, female dealers may be as rare as the objects they sell. We turn the spotlight on four exceptional women who will be commanding booths at the twenty-fourth edition of the Paris Biennale des Antiquaires( September 11 to 21 at the Grand Palais) -- perhaps the chicest display of connoisseurship in the world. bdafrance.eu. From the U.S., dial 011-33 before the numbers listed below. Photograph : Marella Rossi Mosseri, of the &shy; family-owned Aveline, with Figlio in front of a Louis XVI &shy; Chinese -- lacquer commode and an 18th-century Venetian mirror. Marella Rossi Mosseri, of Aveline, deals in mid-17th- to mid-19th-century European furniture and decorative arts. She began working with her father, gallery owner Jean-Marie Rossi, at the age of twenty-four. Ten years on, " I deserve a medal, " she jokes, having succeeded in her collaboration with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. She defines their direction as " unusual and extraordinary furniture and objects from all over Europe -- Swedish, German, Russian and French. " AT THE FAIR : Aveline will show a Louis XVI Chinese-lacquer, ebony and oak commode and two matching corner pieces, all with chiseled gilt-bronze decoration( approximately $7.8 million). " On the ceiling we will have an 18th-century sky-blue Savonnerie rug with a transeptal motif, like a vaulted arch price to be revealed at the fair. One has to dare. " APRES-BIENNALE : Rossi Mosseri recommends " Thiou 1-40-62-96-50 for Thai-fusion dishes or Le Caf Lenotre 1-42-65-85-10 for lunch on the terrace. " Nicole de Pazzis-Chevalier, of Galerie Chevalier, specializes in Flemish and French tapestries, rugs and archaeological textiles from the 15th to 20th centuries. " Antique tapestries represent history, iconography, painting, decoration -- and then there 's the commercial aspect of finding a piece that corresponds to the client, " she explains. " When you do, it 's formidable, " she adds, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to an international roster of clients with decidedly modern loft apartments ; for such grandly scaled and often minimalist abodes she recommends small-sized late-15th- to early-16th-century tapestries with millefleur and feuilles de choux motifs, both of which are increasingly coveted by collectors. AT THE FAIR : De Pazzis-Chevalier will display the early-18th-century masterwork du Prince( above left ; approximately $788,000), by the royal manufactory of Beauvais, from its Story of the Emperor of China series. Photograph : PHOTOGRAPHS MATHIEU FERRIER ; COURTESY GALERIE CHEVALIER APRES-BIENNALE : " Watch night fall and the pyramid light up at the Caf Marly 1-49-26-06-60, or dine at the Bistrot de Paris 1-42-61-15-84. Lots of ambience. " Photograph : Nicole de Pazzis-Chevalier. Gisle Croes, of the eponymous Brussels gallery, has long sold Chinese bronzes and ceramics that date from archaic times through the 11th century A.D. Considered " the empress " of Chinese art dealers, she discovered her vocation while working as a radio broadcaster in Beijing, from 1962 to 1965. " The market is booming, " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in their imperial past and especially in 17th- and 18th-century objects. No one pays higher prices than the Chinese themselves. " The next fashion, she says, will be for archaic bronzes dating from 1600 B.C. to 800 B.C. AT THE FAIR : Croes will bring pieces from northern China 's Ordos region, including plaques depicting bears, tigers and birds of prey( 206 B.C. to A.D. 220 ; $30,000-$90,000), and two gilt-copper crowns( one is shown at right) from the Liao period( A.D. 907 to A.D. 1025 ; $160,000-$180,000) she considers " smashing. " Photograph : Gisle Croes. //PHOTOGRAPHS JEAN-PIERRE GABRIEL ; GISELE CROES ; ARNAUD CARPENTIER ; COURTESY GALERIE VALLOIS APRES-BIENNALE : " Le Voltaire 1-42-61-17-49 is the top, a feast. The raw-mushroom salad that they regularly feature is peerless. Or be sure to try the fabulous pasta that 's served at Il Gusto Sardo 1-47-20-08-90, where the owner 's Sardinian mother is in the kitchen. " Cheska Vallois, of Galerie Vallois, is a powerful pioneer with her husband @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and objects. " We started in 1971, when few people were interested, and we 've never stopped promoting what we consider the essential period of the 20th century. " What she loves are " the modernity of the lines and the sophistication of the materials -- ivory furniture by Jean-Michel Frank, the bronzes of Armand-Albert Rateau, the lacquers of Eileen Gray -- which are as luxurious as traditional antiques. " And as expensive : Vallois has sold work by Frank and others at prices well into the six figures. AT THE FAIR : " We will be doing a nonselling exhibition of twenty-five masterpieces of Art Deco that have passed through my hands over the last thirty-five years, assembled from collections all over Europe and the U.S. " Photograph : Cheska Vallois. APRES-BIENNALE : " For a real dinner, Restaurant Laurent 1-42-25-00-39, where I always order fish. " Photograph : Chair( 1924) by Jean Dunand and Jean Lambert-Rucki. 
