4084241 WHAT IF YOU COULD SPEND an entire season hunting your way across north america, hitting the best whitetail hot spots for big bucks? Better yet, what if your goal was to take the next world-record whitetail? sound crazy? Maybe. now, try to think of a way in which you could also take all of the readers of Outdoor Life with you on that journey. Mind-boggling, is n't it? But that 's just what hunting editor andrew McKean pitched to me last year. What andrew proposed was a year-long series-both in the pages of Outdoor Life and on outdoorlife. com-that would not only follow his adventures in pursuit of the next world record, but educate readers and online users about everything to do with trophy whitetails. We 've called the program record Quest, and andrew 's dream journey has just launched in both his hunting section and at outdoorlife. com/recordquest. In every issue, andrew will share all sorts of whitetail information, from how to manage your own land for big bucks to tips and tactics you can use this fall when @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and you 'll discover andrew 's latest blog posts as he pursues his historic quest. you 'll also find postings from all of our editors as we head into the field for whitetails this fall. Video clips and photo galleries will allow you to see all the action along the way. and a special " answers " tool will allow you to ask questions of andrew or any of our editors about anything related to whitetails. there 's even a map and a special calendar, so you can follow andrew and the rest of our crew this entire season. We want to hear about your whitetail adventures this fall as well, so feel free to weigh in anytime, share your stories around our virtual campfire and let us know how your season is progressing. A DAY WITH MILO HANSON This month, record Quest brings you a special exclusive interview with world-record whitetail holder Milo hanson. traveling to the very field where he shot the buck and hearing Milo describe what happened in his own words on video is a revelation @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the editor of Petersen 's Hunting at the time, and we desperately wanted to get the cover story. Outdoor Life prevailed, however, and ran a photo of Milo 's buck on the April 1994 cover. What we ended up doing instead was getting the entire backstory behind the taking of the deer ; we ran that as our cover story on Hunting the next month, with photos of Milo and his buck by the late Ian McMurchy. When Andrew said Milo had granted him permission to come up and see him in Biggar, Saskatchewan, in March, I began to wonder. After all the years and the tens of thousands of miles that Milo has traveled, after all the speaking engagements and all the nights spent on the road touring the country and sharing his story, is he still happy that the record is his? Judge for yourself, but I do n't believe Milo would have traded it for anything. What really comes through in this interview is that, despite his fame, Milo @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ before he shot the buck. In many ways, he 's a bit like all of us. He 's just a man who, through a particularly interesting twist of fate, happened to be the guy who shot the world-record buck. But it might have been anybody. That 's what makes his story so appealing. This is n't some rich guy who went hunting super-bucks behind some high fence someplace. This is a guy like you or me, who set out one day with a few buddies to go deer hunting and came home with the world record. That Milo remains so humble is an inspiration. It 's a great interview and just part of the fun that Andrew will be bringing to Record Quest this year. So check it out as we follow what I 'm sure is going to be one of the wildest whitetail seasons ever. 
