2116741 There are some moments in Washington life when it seems as if the entire political class is conspiring to prove that the rules are... that there are no rules. The mayhem surrounding Newt Gingrich 's ethical problems has that feel to it. In the past few weeks all the important lines of law and decorum have been crossed -- by Gingrich, by House Republicans and Democrats, and above all by the members of the ethics committee charged with keeping those lines neat and tidy. The unusual $300,000 fine levied against the Speaker by the subcommittee that spent two years investigating him may be intended to restore some sense of propriety. But the bitterness and embarrassment of the Gingrich mess will linger in the marbled corridors of the Capitol for some time to come. When the committee handed down its verdict last week, Gingrich got off with a reprimand, not the censure that would have required him to step down as Speaker. If the full House goes along with the recommendation, that alone will make him the first Speaker in history to be disciplined in any way. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ says that for years the Speaker flouted House standards of conduct, is tougher than many Republicans expected. And the surprising fine -- which is supposed to cover the cost of additional investigation made necessary by Gingrich 's slippery replies to committee inquiries --is a lot of money for an offense some in the G.O.P. have described as akin to " jaywalking. " Chairwoman Nancy Johnson of Connecticut did her best to call the penalty " tough and unprecedented compared to past cases. " It will be -- if the fine comes out of Gingrich ' s pocket. In a brazen wiggle, his office left open the possibility that the fine could be paid from campaign contributions. That would render it all but meaningless ; it would also open him up to the accusations made against Bill Clinton 's legal-defense fund -- that it 's an open door for influence peddlers. In other words, an ethical problem. Which is one more reason that everybody in Washington is wondering whether Gingrich will still be Gingrich once the dust settles. After two @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the Speaker admitted in December that he had failed to seek proper legal guidance before using contributions to his tax-exempt foundation to finance a college lecture course, one that even he said was aimed at the partisan goal of electing a G.O.P. Congress. He also admitted turning in false information to committee investigators. The final report that Cole put before the committee on Friday made it clear that he believed Gingrich had broken the law. He had ignored plain understandings, Cole told the committee on Friday, that " you 're supposed to keep politics and tax-deductible situations separate. " And if Gingrich had not sought the legal advice that would have steered him away from that course, it was because he was reckless or knew that no lawyer would let him do what he had in mind. 
