2024841 Fuzzy little ovals. Blots of orange light. They resemble specks of one 's lunch dropped accidentally onto the photo. Images of the central area of the Orion Nebula( M42) taken last December with the rejuvenated Hubble Space Telescope( HST) are not, however, plagued by defects from the darkroom or the lunch table. Instead, the fuzzy ovals are protoplanetary disks ; the first **27;207;TOOLONG viewed from a distance of 1,500 light-years. Astronomers investigate the Orion Nebula and its many young stars because it is the largest and most active region of starbirth in our part of the Galaxy. The vast sheets and clouds of gas and dust comprising the Orion Nebula, visible to the naked-eye as a hazy " star " in the Sword of Orion on dark November evenings, are slowly coalescing into infant suns. The region is the richest known in stars, in fact, with more than 4,000 stars per cubic light-year packed into the center of the nebula. Because the gas-into-stars machinery is operating on such a massive scale in the Orion Nebula, the area offers the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ young stars and their possible planetary systems and the hot stars embedded in the nebula. But do Orion 's young stars even have planets? The question feeds into age-old wonder about life on other planets. To investigate the existence of possible planetary systems in the Orion Nebula, Rice University astronomers C. Robert O'Dell and Zheng Wen( now at the University of Kentucky) began the imaging survey in 1989 that produced last December 's images of protoplanetary disks, or " proplyds, " as researchers call them. O'Dell examined 110 stars and found gas and dust, " the ingredients for making planets, " around 56 of them. " This provides strong proof that protoplanetary disks are a common product of star formation, " says O'Dell. The discovery of the protoplanetary disks meshes well with the understanding of how the solar system formed some 4.6 billion years ago. A disk similar to those we now see surrounding the new stars of Orion coalesced into the Sun 's attendant debris -- the planets, comets, and asteroids. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ has such a large centrifugal force that it can not be funneled into the young star itself, so it remains behind to form a disk. According to O'Dell, the proplyds probably contain materials much like those in the solar nebula -- carbon, silicates, and other elements and compounds similar to those on Earth. The mass in the outer rims of the proplyds alone probably amounts to several times that of Earth. One of the most clearly visible disks measures 53 billion miles across, or 7.5 times the diameter of the solar system( see right). Seemingly supporting this observation, another, closer protoplanetary disk was observed earlier around the star Beta Pictoris and dusty disks have been spotted around Fomalhaut, Vega, and other stars. From all of this evidence, it seems clear that we are seeing solar systems in the making. No other explanation appears to be plausible. The suggested abundance of extrasolar planets, implied by the proplyds, points up the possibilities for large numbers of planets supporting living beings elsewhere @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ' ideas on extraterrestrial life were limited to statistical shell games based on probabilities. The probabilities already indeed look good : One needs only a tiny fraction of the planets that presumably exist throughout the cosmos to meet the right conditions for huge numbers of inhabited planets. Despite the favorable odds, however, much of the hypothesizing was close to guesswork. Now that guesswork is supported even more strongly by mounting evidence that favors the existence of life throughout the cosmos. " At least half of the young stars have the potential for forming planets, " says O'Dell. And a measurable fraction of those planets would have the right conditions for the formation and evolution of living beings. Proplyds are only one object being studied in the recent renaissance of stellar research centered on the Orion Nebula. Several astronomers are focusing their attention on the extremely hot and massive star Theta(1) C Orionis, the brightest star in the nebula 's central star cluster called the Trapezium. This star -- visible in backyard scopes at medium power -- bathes the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ it with a powerful stellar wind, creating shock waves that slam into the gas and dust along their paths. We see these glowing shock fronts in large areas of the nebula like the familiar sheets and walls and small parts like the proplyds. This star, then, is instrumental in revealing the proplyds. The proplyds, in turn, tell us about the stars inside them, including their stars ' radiation output and ability to regulate the way they spin. Some of these odd revelations resulted from the work of my own research group, which includes Marc Gagne of the University of Georgia and John Stauffer of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Recently we have observed the Orion Nebula with the high-resolution imager on board the ROSAT orbiting X-ray observatory. We needed the fine resolution of this combination to produce meaningful data in an area so jammed with stars. Our group detected more than 250 stellar X-ray sources in an area 25 foot square centered on the Trapezium. Most of these stars are low-mass, Sun-like stars. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ include the brightest beacons in the Trapezium. Not only is Theta(1) C Orionis the brightest star in the area in optical wavelengths, but it is a powerful X-ray emitter. It is an O7-type star with about 30 times more mass than the Sun and is seven times hotter, at about 40,000 K. The ROSAT observations of this star were taken over a period of 11 months, and we were startled to see that Theta(1) C Orionis changed its X-ray emission over this interval by about 50 percent. More recently a group of astronomers at the European Southern Observatory led by Otmar Stahl of the Landessternwarte Heidelberg-Konigstuhl discovered that Theta(1) C Orionis varies its hydrogen and helium emission over a period of about 15 days. Once our group became aware of this, we searched for this period in the X-ray data and found that indeed the star 's X-ray output parallels its hydrogen and helium emission. Adding to the evidence, Nolan Walborn of the Space Telescope Science Institute and Joy Nichols of Computer Sciences Corporation waded back through ultraviolet spectra taken @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and found that the star 's ultraviolet emission also varied over a roughly 15-day interval. The question then arose : Why is this powerful star varying its highly magnetized, hot star with a strong stellar wind. The star 's rotation axis is tipped to our line of sight and the star 's rotation causes hot spots to move into view, regularly brightening the star. If this is the case, which astronomers currently believe it to be, then all of Theta(1) C Orionis ' energy output -- in visible light, X rays, and ultraviolet -- results from extended features tied to the surface of the star. Once astronomers realized Theta(1) C Orionis ionizes everything near it, they sought more details on some of the objects being ionized. For example, Guido Garay of the Universidad de Chile led a team of astronomers who discovered a number of very small radio sources in the Orion Nebula. The nature of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ class with an acronym based on its observational characteristics. Being an animal lover, Garay 's stable of objects includes PIGs( partially ionized globules), DEERS( deeply embedded energetic radio sources), and FOXES( fluctuating optical and X-ray emitting sources)! In a follow-up project, Marcello Felli of the Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri in Florence, Italy, and his collaborators have used the Very Large Array in New Mexico to discover a number of radio sources in the Trapezium, both thermal sources and nonthermal sources. The former consist of hot gas, and the latter have electrons interacting with magnetic fields. Many of Felli 's thermal sources coincide with optical stars, which are thought to be other examples of circumstellar disks. The research continues. Like O'Dell, Charles Prosser of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics has used HST to look at the Orion Nebula. With the Planetary Camera and filters that excluded light from nebulosity, Prosser and friends found more than 300 stars packed into a small volume of about 2.3 cubic light-years @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ down to about 15 percent of the Sun 's mass. They have found that 80 percent of these stars are less than a million years old. They too found a few proplyds being " lit up " by Theta(1) C Orionis. The research by Prosser has given us a penetrating look inside Orion 's womb. This central area of the Trapezium has also received scrutiny in the midinfrared wavelengths of 8.8 and 11.7 microns. Tom Hayward, James Houck, and John Miles of Cornell University used the 200-inch Hale telescope on Palomar Mountain to create images that reveal dusty counterparts to objects previously seen only at optical and radio wavelengths. The images show several parabolic arcs aiming away from Theta(1) C Orionis, further evidence of the powerful stellar wind blowing from the star. The dust may have been pushed into glowing gas by Theta(1) C Orionis ' wind or produced in the glowing gas clouds. The ability to separate the to components shows the value of observations in the midinfrared and the need for high-resolution observations. Another infrared study @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ reveals other details of the mysterious cluster embedded in the Trapezium. Stauffer, along with Mark McCaughrean of the Max Planck Institut for Astronomie in Heidelberg, Germany, used the 3.5-meter telescope at Calar Alto, Spain, to survey stars near the center of the Trapezium. Stauffer and McCaughrean discovered more than 100 stars in a region only 0.3 light-year across, which yields an astonishing density of nearly 4,000 stars per cubic light-year. This survey uncovered stellar counterparts to a large number of knots of gas observed with HST and by other methods. The discovery of stars corresponding to these knots means that probably hundreds of proplyds exist in the duster, each a young star with a burgeoning solar system. Using the infrared and radio surveys and HST imagery, Stauffer has estimated and found that greater than 50 percent of the stars in the Trapezium Cluster have proplyds. Astronomers now know that protoplanetary disks exist in great numbers, at least in the Trapezium Cluster inside the Orion Nebula. That, in itself, is a tremendous confirmation @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ an overwhelmingly large number of planetary systems must exist in the Galaxy and in other galaxies. But that 's not enough for some astronomers, who want to know how the proplyds affect the stars buried inside them and their ability to radiate energy outward. Suzan Edwards of Smith College and Steve Strom of the University of Massachusetts have studied solar-type stars in the Orion Nebula. They probed the role played by a circumstellar disk in regulating the spin of the star lying inside. They studied three dozen stars and found that stars with circumstellar disks have rotation periods of more than 4 days, while stars without disks spin more rapidly. The results suggest that a star 's rate of spin does n't speed up to normal until the circumstellar disk dissipates. When the star 's radiation and stellar wind drive away the material, the star " spins up " at a much faster rate of rotation. The star spins faster in part because its magnetic field rapidly decreases in strength. Such a drop ought to be discernible in X-ray @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ X-ray energy and the intermediate mass stars, those that have spun up, producing little or no X-ray emission. That 's exactly what our team sees in the record of ROSAT X-ray observations of the Orion Nebula region. Astronomers are rejoicing in the natural laboratory of the Orion Nebula, struck by the way theory and observation are coming together to show how stars are born and how they evolve toward life with a family of planets. No longer is Orion simply a beautiful light in the wintertime sky, a playland for exploring wisps and tendrils of nebulosity in the telescope. It is that, certainly. But it is also the place where we are documenting for the first time the first million years in the life of a star like our Sun. Jean-Pierre Caillault is an astronomer at the University of Georgia specializing in X-ray studies of the Orion Nebula and other star-forming regions. <p> 
