2037441 SMALL BUSINESS owners and managers urgently need to make contingency plans to accommodate growing employee demands for family-related leave time and schedule flexibility. Those who do not are shortchanging their companies and possibly compromising their firms ' futures. The biggest issue, often overlooked, in a small business is how to get work done productively when a key employee needs to be absent to solve a family problem. Another top concern is how to accommodate schedule changes for employees who find normal business hours unworkable for their family situations. The Wall Street Journal noted in 1994 that small businesses appear ready to cope with the requirements of the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act( FMLA). Yet, few seem to realize that dealing with the legislation 's provisions on an " as needed " basis, without contingency plans, is not enough. Societal pressures are building that will force smaller organizations to realize that employees ' family problems increasingly will conflict with maintaining productivity in the workplace. Greater numbers are seeking a better balance between family and work obligations, as evidenced by the wide support for the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and management frequently collided over these issues, with key workers in small companies often bowing to the needs of their employers. In the future, though, this likely will be reversed. The workforce is continuing to undergo restructuring. More women -- the traditional caregivers in American society -- are employed either full or part time. The number of two-income families is growing, and the amount of men taking more responsibility for daily child care is escalating. Because of the complexity of modern life and changing interfamiliar expectations, employees are finding an increasing variety of family-based reasons for being absent from work or requesting alternate schedules. According to one human resources manager, workers ' family problems usually follow a similar pattern : The younger group tends to have more marital and child-raising problems. The 30-39s are running into school and behavioral difficulties with their kids hitting their early teens or late adolescence. The 40-49s are having to cope with both their children and aging parents, while the 50-plus group has to deal with their parents and their @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a family and a business concern of increasing dimension. Any working parent who has lost a babysitter or other child care provider with little notice can testify about the emotional havoc created. For adults, job responsibilities suddenly collide with the mandatory care needs of young children. Since the U.S. has a growing population of older persons, elder care also is becoming an increasing consideration. Although small businesses appear willing to cope with the requirements of the FMLA, few appear to have thought about many of the implications. Are they ready to face the increase in complicated requests for work schedule flexibility? Are they prepared to accept an attendant reduction in productivity during the temporary loss of a key employee? Are they in a position to attempt to mitigate potential production losses through advanced planning? Without sufficient tactical planning, most substitutions of a key person or changes in work schedule are likely to lead to production slippage. From a productivity viewpoint, a temporary replacement almost never is equal to an experienced employee. Even if the temporary @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ work in emergencies, production slippage probably will occur somewhere in the system. To determine how organizations are responding to employees ' critical family needs, in-depth interviews were conducted with human resources managers at 14 small firms or autonomous divisions of larger companies. All have reputations for being " family friendly, " and eight are family owned. The basic approaches they utilized included telecommuting, hiring temporary personnel, cross-training, job sharing, and offering special services. In all examples, the solutions were determined only after a problem arose, but in some cases, managers developed creative solutions others can copy. Telecommuting. In one company, a manager caring for a baby was able to work with her staff from home, via telecommuting, and limited coming to the office to two or three days per week. In another situation, a firm retained the services of a writer, through telecommuting, when the staff member moved to another city because of a spouse 's job change. Obviously, telecommuting wo n't work if a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, it does present a positive, inexpensive alternative( currently about $2,000 for good basic equipment) for companies wanting to retain the active participation of certain key personnel. The cost/benefit of investing in electronic equipment should be considered in company contingency planning programs. Smaller firms need to be alert to issues inherent in the use of flexible working arrangements, however. Suzanne Fields, a columnist for the Washington Times, warned that, when flexible working arrangements are not offered to others working under similar conditions, hostility can develop : " The latest strains in workplace strategies pit men against men and women against women.... Conflicts arise if there 's a disparity in productivity and effort. No one complains about a guy coaching his son 's Little League team or his daughter 's basketball team -- as long as it does n't mean a colleague has to write the brief he should have, entertain his customers, or take his weekend calls.... Nearly two-thirds of workers in the United States are without children under the age of 18. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ not fit all. " Temporary personnel. Hiring a temporary person is another obvious alternative, but small firms must be aware that training time for a temporary employee can be considerable, and it also decreases productivity for the trainer. In many smaller organizations, where it is common for an individual to do a number of tasks, the training should be recognized as a complex job, with cost and productivity implications. To avoid problems inherent in hiring temporary personnel, one of the firms in the survey made a conscious decision to build extra capacity into staffing. An executive of the firm noted : " We used to staff right where we had to be. So if anybody got sick, if anyone went on vacation, right away, it was kind of a crisis. The day-to-day work just did n't get done. So in the last four to five years we 've increased our staffing to the point where some minor illness does n't turn into a real problem. " Another manufacturing firm employs " floaters @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ have up-to-date skills and quickly fill the gap when someone becomes ill or must leave immediately because of a family emergency. The same company also trains college students during summer months to replace vacationing employees. If an emergency arises when the school year resumes, students are contacted about working on a fill-in basis. The plant has some flexibility in using student-workers because it has a three-shift schedule. Some businesses have been able to find unique sources for developing pools of temporary workers. One uses the local school district 's list of substitute teachers to find persons who want short-term work. Another option is to utilize retirees, especially those who need relatively little training. A third possibility is to consider allowing an employee to work when the company is not open for business. One firm permitted a permanent worker to work unsupervised from three to seven in the morning. The unusual arrangement allowed the employee to attend to child care duties during the day and also earn a part-time income. The human resources manager described the employee as a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ arrangement would not be suitable for everyone desiring it. Cross-training. To mitigate emergency conditions, employees can be cross-trained. This is especially desirable where the job requires a great deal of teamwork. On the negative side, cross-training can involve extra costs which a smaller firm may be unable to support. One respondent also warned that some jobs may not be suitable for cross-training because of the technical expertise required. An excellent way for a small business to begin thinking about personnel flexibility is to examine the job and assess the time it effectively takes the individual holding the position to do the work. It is possible that some employees who want time to devote to family concerns may have grown more efficient in their jobs over time, so that their work can be completed in a shorter time period. One human resources manager described such a situation : " Jane works in the office and has been here about eight years. At this point, what used to take her eight hours a day, she can get done @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ her and for us. And now that her kids are getting older and can stay more by themselves, she can give us more hours. She 's becoming more flexible for the company. " Job sharing is feasible for some positions, but not for others. One company encountered problems with two people sharing a single job in engineering, but found it succeeded for office workers. Another reported that two employees, needing time for children, share one job, each putting in 21 hours a week. Both are paid for an extra hour a week to have a luncheon meeting, outside the office, to coordinate their efforts. Another firm allows a production control job to be filled by two persons, one working part time for a total of 24 hours a week. The other 16 hours per week are covered by a full-time employee who has other duties during the rest of his workweek. When the full-timer has to be absent, the part-timer puts in a full 40-hour week. Offering special services. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ responding to family needs that others could find beneficial. One of the 14 firms interviewed has 80% of its employees in the 30-39 age bracket. The company has found this particular group has a high divorce rate. Management noticed that, for about a five-month period, newly divorced employees were " here physically, but not mentally. " To assist workers through this period, and improve productivity, the firm tries to facilitate employee-counselor contact to help new divorcees deal with their emotional and financial woes. The organization indicates that it has had some real successes as a result of the program. Other innovative options exist for small businesses. A few might pool resources and offer some type of dependent services, especially those related to child care. Small firms located in a specific geographic area, for instance, might work together to offer a cooperative day care center or organize elder care support groups. These actions not only would help their own workers, but can make the immediate area more attractive to potential employees. In @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ them time. A group of small businesses could encourage, for example, a dry cleaner to open nearby. Company cafeterias could consider selling packaged dinners for evening family meals. Xerox Corp., at its research facility in Palo Alto, Calif., not only stocks library books on parenting, but also offers lunch-hour parenting courses. According to the company, communication between parents attending these courses improves and pays dividends in the form of reduced stress. Contingency planning " Finding solutions that get the work done and help in family situations is one of the biggest management challenges of the day, " Business Week( June 28, 1993) concluded. Larger firms seem to be rising to the challenge. Aiming to become a " family friendly " firm by employing " work-family coordinators " has become an organizational posture used by some corporations. DuPont, a leader in this area, has a Director of Work Force Partnering who negotiates with management on family-related issues. These come to management 's attention through questionnaire data or through reports @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ do n't seem to be responding to social pressures in the same way. Media reports indicate only some concern about having to offer job-protected leaves to persons who are n't sick -- e.g., new fathers. Obviously, some small firms do n't perceive how stressed working parents with new babies can be. None of the 14 organizations interviewed had developed any contingency plans for the temporary loss of key employees or more flexible scheduling for workers with special family needs. In fact, none even thought contingency plans to be very important. Several said that contingency planning would mean they were putting company practice " in stone. " The same firms reasoned that some employees would manipulate the system, placing employers in the uncomfortable position of having to develop alternative solutions. Nearly all managers interviewed said they felt most family-related employee problems could be handled if their company employee policies were " flexible. " Yet, one particularly aware manager noted that flexibility, in itself, is not a panacea : " It 's going to be a shop @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ take more work.... If someone on shift one comes in a half hour early and leaves a half hour early, the same thing must happen on the second and third shifts... You have to move three persons. " One executive explained his technical firm 's lack of planning by saying, " We wo n't have any suggestions until we 're confronted with those family-employee situations. We just have n't had any. If we knew what area it was going to happen in, we 'd plan for it. But we just do n't see a need. " Yet, the same executive noted elsewhere in the interview that the company had to cope with scheduling problems arising from family situations. Two organizations reported taking tiny steps in the right direction by doing some formal training in family awareness. A third had conducted employee focus groups on family problems. One human resources person stated : " Until recently, the expectation was that key people would learn how to deal with family issues by osmosis ; the culture would @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ company brought in a consulting firm to conduct a regular seminar on management sensitivity. " Slowly, a few small businesses are recognizing the need to change their approach to meeting employees ' family needs. In the not-too-distant future, it may be hoped that others will begin to see the value of adopting contingency plans that can be implemented when employees face family crises. From the interviews with the 14 firms, it appears that when family issues do arise, they often are handled on a decentralized basis. A decision by an employee 's supervisor is key to any option, and, in some cases, obtaining leave time or a more flexible schedule involves a departmental negotiation process. If a company wants to develop a contingency plan, its first step should be to identify the major types of family-related concerns, where they are occurring, and other potential problems. For instance, if a large portion of the middle management group consists of younger women, pregnancy leaves will have to be a consideration. The current practice @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the extent of family pressures. Consequently, a formal company-wide review of the firm 's experiences must take place. Once all major problems have been identified, those requiring quick management action should be addressed first. Others should be discussed with employees, and they should be asked to offer their reactions and propose solutions. If, for example, numerous workers are abusing alcohol, a discussion with an employee group would n't necessarily be helpful in deciding whether the firm needs an employee assistance program. The need is evident. On the other hand, if job scheduling has become an issue because some workers have serious child or elder care concerns, discussions with employees probably would provide some insightful solutions. These discussions should be handled car fully to avoid having a few individuals push their own agendas. After listening to its employees, a small company may determine that the supporting resources needed are not available. This can lead to some discontent, even if the resource problem is talked about openly. If handled well, though @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the employer cares that workers face serious problems. It is equally important for employees to understand that a financially healthy company should care about its workers, but that financial health is based on the firm 's ability to achieve quality productivity in every facet of its operation. Once possible financial risks have been assessed and adjustments for employee time schedules completed, a small business needs to make contingency plans for each of the key managerial and line personnel who might have to be absent for an extended period. The plan should show : * Who replaces each key employee. * The projected impact on productivity if a temporary person fills a vacant position, or if more than one temporary person is needed to fill the slot. * A job description for the person serving as a replacement and assignment of other duties to specific individuals. * A priority listing of duties that might have to be postponed. * The names of individuals who could serve as back-up replacements in the event the primary candidate is unavailable. * Productivity benchmarks @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the key employee. * The name of the person responsible for evaluating and supporting any temporary employees. In many small businesses, senior managers may have to be the working substitute. Consequently, they must be prepared to work on the factory floor, handle daily customer phone calls, or to do other jobs using somewhat rusty skills. Serving as a replacement may be physically and psychologically difficult because they still will need to fulfill their management responsibilities. On the other hand, it can be beneficial to staff morale to know that management is willing to share the load. While no organization can plan for every situation, a small business should anticipate such possibilities as long-term leaves for key employees and work schedule flexibility for those with difficult family problems. Management can not afford to ignore the social pressures that increasingly will affect its ability to maintain productivity. The authors are, respectively, J. Warren McClure Research Professor or Marketing and professor emeritus of sociology, Rochester( N.Y.) Institute of Technology. <p> 
