4110541 The purpose of the European Space Agency 's Planck mission is to observe the Big Bang 's faint relic radiation that fills the universe, which is called the cosmic microwave background( CMB). First, however, scientists have to sort through the stronger foreground microwave signals. On February 1 3, the Planck team released the mission 's newest microwave images of the entire sky, showing the foreground radiation from the Milky Way Galaxy. <p> One set of data displays the distribution of carbon monoxide gas, which astronomers use as a tracer for areas of star formation. The new Planck maps show never-before-imaged regions of star formation. <p> The data also show strong microwave signals perpendicular to the Milky Way 's center. " The haze comes from the region surrounding the center of our galaxy and looks like light produced when energetic electrons and positrons accelerate through magnetic fields, " says Davide Pietrobon of NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. A couple of years ago, NASA 's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope also imaged this emission, which astronomers now call the " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ causes the strong signals at the Milky Way 's center. " There are many possibilities and theories ranging from galactic winds to a jet generated by the black hole at the center of our galaxy to exotic physics related to dark matter, " says Gregory Dobler of the University of California, Santa Barbara. " The problem is that the picture that has emerged with the Planck data, as well as the Fermi data, challenges all of the explanations... None of them fit the data just right. " <p> The Planck team will release its first dataset of CMB observations in 201 3. - L. K. Sidebar <p> Mysterious haze. The Planck mission to image the leftover radiation from the Big Bang has captured data from microwave emission in the Milky Way Galaxy. The telescope also detected the " Fermi bubbles "( in oval), structures each some 25,000 light-years tall emanating from the galaxy 's center, ESA/Planck collaboration 
