2034741 After Marshal Alexandre Berthier hobbled the French and allied forces with an exasperating series of orders and counterorders, Napoleon arrived to achieve an incomplete victory that he would later regard as his most brilliant moment. // The battle of Abensburg, the maneuver of Landshut and the battle of Eggmuhl, all in Austria, were the boldest, the most brilliant, the ablest maneuvers of Napoleon. " Thus did deposed French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte reflect on his past glories from the vantage of St. Helena. He had reason to be proud. Although his final victory was incomplete, within the space of seven days he had concentrated his own army, badly defeated his numerically superior Austrian opponents and turned the tide of the 1809 Austrian campaign. The struggle that rolled across the hills near Regensburg, aka Ratisbon, in April 1809 remained fresh in his memory many years later. The war of 1809 had its origins in Vienna and the legacy of repeated defeats the Hapsburg Empire had suffered at the hands of revolutionary and imperial France. Those humiliating reverses had left a bitter knot of resentment @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a desire for vengeance against the upstart French ruler. Moreover, the Hapsburgs were haunted by visions of a dark future, an oppressive fear that Napoleon, once he had concluded his affairs on the Iberian Peninsula, would again turn his attention to central Europe and eradicate the Danube monarchy once and for all. " Can any circumstances be imagined, " asked Hapsburg foreign minister Graf Johan Philipp Stadion, " which would prevent Napoleon from falling on Austria as soon as he decides that such an undertaking is possible, or indeed, even easy to execute? " With Napoleon and his veteran armies apparently occupied in Spain, however, key figures at the Viennese court, particularly the " war party " of the Empress Maria Ludovica, thought they saw an opportunity to strike. Austria 's intentions were no surprise to Napoleon. Relations between the two powers had been tense since 1808. By January the following year, Napoleon was convinced that another conflict with the Hapsburg crown was inevitable. " The House of Austria is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Viceroy of Italy, " the Empress " party seems to want war. " He dared delay no longer. With the Spanish armies scattered and the British in retreat, his presence in Spain no longer seemed necessary. He turned operations over to his marshals and prepared to depart. On January 15, he sent a flurry of letters directing additional French forces to Bavaria and asking his German allies to place their contingents on a war footing. Two days later, he boarded his coach for the arduous journey to Paris, hoping that these military movements and his return to France would " demonstrate to Austria that this is not a joke. " Despite his presentiments and precautions, however, the initiative lay with Vienna, and Austria attacked before Napoleon could complete his preparations. The Hapsburg army lumbered into Bavaria on April 10, 1809. Hoping to catch the dispersed French and German divisions before they could concentrate, the Main Army, 119,000 men in six corps( III through VI, plus the I and II @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Charles Louis John, Archduke of Austria and Duke of Teschen, crossed the Inn River and pushed north toward the Isar. South of the Main Army, a lone division under Feldmarschall-Leutnant Franz Jellacic moved on Munich, protecting Charles ' left, while General Heinrich von Bellegarde led the I and II corps out of Bohemia north of the Danube. The invaders faced no real resistance, but their advance was painfully slow. Charles had to order a rest day as early as the 13th. The leading corps finally reached the Isar at Landshut on the morning of the 16th, but attempts to cross were delayed for several hours by the skillful defense of Maj. Gen. Bernhard von Deroy 's outnumbered 3rd Bavarian Division. Archduke Charles spent the following day bringing his army across the Isar as Deroy retired to the north. The evening of the 17th found the Austrian Main Army disposed with three of its regular corps( III, IV and V) and both reserve corps concentrated along the roads leading north and northwest from Landshut. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 's command structure was proving clumsy, movements were torpid and Charles was already beginning to weaken himself by detaching elements of his army for sideshow operations. The seizure of Munich typified the Austrian efforts and their results : It discomfited Bavaria 's king but did nothing to support Charles ' larger plans. It only served to deprive the Main Army of 9,300 men in the coming battles. Slow-moving, cautious and dispersed about the countryside, the 49,500 troops of Bellegarde 's two corps north of the Danube were equally useless. Photograph On April 21, 1809-11 days after Hapsburg Archduke Charles ' Main Army invaded Bavaria-counterattacking French and Bavarian forces retake the town of Landshut from the retreating Austrians( Anne S.K. Brown Military Collection). Photograph On April 21, 1809-11 days after Hapsburg Archduke Charles ' Main Army invaded Bavaria-counterattacking French and Bavarian forces retake the town of Landshut from the retreating Austrians( Anne S.K. Brown Military Collection). // Despite these weaknesses, Charles stood on the threshold of a rare opportunity to defeat the isolated allied forces @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of staff, Marshal Alexandre Berthier, was the de facto army commander. He was not the man for the task. His aide de camp, Colonel Louis-Francois Lejeune, described the courageous Berthier as " trembling and sinking beneath the weight of responsibility " he had to bear. His directives were confusing and repeatedly modified or rescinded. The French and their allies thus spent the early days of the campaign marching and countermarching with no clear picture of the enemy situation. As a result, the army that had been scattered from Munich to Nuremberg when the Austrians crossed the Inn was still divided seven days into the campaign. By April 17, Berthier 's oft-changed directions had brought the army to the following positions : Marshal Andre Massena was slowly assembling two corps( his own IV Corps and General de Division Nicolas Oudinot 's 11 Corps) around Augsburg ; Marshal Francois Lefebvre 's Bavarian VII Corps was just south of the Danube, moving on Ingolstadt ; the Wurttemberg VIII Corps under General de Ligne Dominique Vandamme, and other @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Louis Nicholas Davout 's III Corps was in and around Regensburg. Davout 's situation was critical. Dangerously exposed at Regensburg, with a good day 's march separating him from the nearest support, he might be cut off and hurled into the Danube if the Austrians moved swiftly. Such was the situation Napoleon faced when he arrived at Donauworth at 5 a.m. on the 17th. // SITUATION ON APRIL 19 approx 3 pm // The emperor found an appalling paucity of information at headquarters. " I await news of the enemy with impatience, " he wrote to Davout, and to Lefebvre : " Send me an officer who knows the situation of your troops perfectly. Inform me yourself of where you believe the principal forces of the enemy to be. " In spite of his sketchy knowledge of recent Austrian movements, he was already thinking offensively. Davout, for example, was to seize any opportunity to fall on the enemy column advancing from Landshut, and Massena received instructions to " be able to march the moment the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. " The appearance of the emperor brought an abrupt shift in French operations. The weather was dreadful and provisions were scarce, but a palpable aura of confidence seemed to course through the entire army as decision replaced vacillation. " At last, he was with the army, with us, " rejoiced an officer in Davout 's corps. " Now let the kaiserliks Austrians come! " Based on the limited information available, Napoleon rapidly developed a plan to regain the initiative. First, Davout was to slip west from Regensburg, join Lefebvre and Vandamme near Abensburg, and then strike south toward Landshut. Second, Napoleon directed Massena and Oudinot to march on Landshut with all speed in an effort to cut the Austrian lines of communication and trap Charles ' army against the Danube. During the night and throughout the 18th, French forces hastened to comply with Napoleon 's directives. Davout brought his entire corps south of the Danube at Regensburg and prepared to move west. Lefebvre 's men headed for Abensburg with Vandamme @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ moving toward Landshut. As Napoleon concentrated his army, Archduke Charles was preparing to attack its most isolated element, Davout 's III Corps. Learning early on the 18th that the French marshal was still south of the Danube around Regensburg, Charles deployed his army to prevent a juncture of Davout with Lefebvre. By evening, more than 70,000 men of the Austrian III, IV, and I Reserve corps were gathered about the archduke 's headquarters at Rohr, ready to intercept Davout 's anticipated march west. While this formidable force dealt with Davout, its left flank would be protected by the V and II Reserve corps along the bluffs above the tiny Abens River. Additional-in fact, excessive-flank protection was provided by Feldmarschall-Leutnant Johann Freiherr von Hiller 's VI Corps around Moosburg and Jella &,c's; division in the Munich area. Bellegarde 's I Corps remained far north of the Danube, but the bulk of the II Corps moved to within striking distance of Regensburg. As night fell on the 18th, Charles finally seemed to be in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the iron core of Napoleon 's army in Germany. Time, however, was running out for the archduke. Napoleon was at hand and rapidly concentrating his army for a devastating counterblow. Charles ' vague plan for the 19th reduced his chances for success. Although the order issued that morning directed the Austrian central force toward Regensburg to find Davout, the archduke divided his command into three widely separated columns aimed at Eggmuhl, Dunzling and Teugn. Unable to support one another in the hilly terrain, weakened by having lost detachments and receiving little guidance from Charles, these columns would essentially conduct individual, uncoordinated actions for the remainder of the day. Davout 's 52,000 men were also moving in several columns on the morning of the 19th, but his divisions were closely formed and capable of mutual support. Late in the morning, they collided with elements of Field Marshals Prince Friedrich Hohenzollern-Hechingen 's III and Prince Franz von Rosenberg 's IV corps as the Austrians probed tentatively toward the Danube. Rosenberg, at the head of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ fight with the outnumbered light cavalry and infantry of General de Division Alexandre Montbrun 's command. In the confusing tangle of woods and hills, however, Rosenberg was unable to gain a clear picture of the enemy strength. The uncertainty reinforced his natural caution, and he failed to exploit his superior numbers. Montbrun 's 5,000 men thus handily kept 15,000 Austrians occupied for the balance of the day and retired in perfect order at dusk. Meanwhile, a far more sanguinary struggle was taking place atop the ridges between Hausen and Teugn. There, General de Division Louis St. Hilaire 's 4th Division bumped into Hohenzollern 's corps on a ridge above Teugn at about 11 a.m. Despite Austrian advantages of position and numbers, St. Hilaire, one of the best French divisional commanders, immediately charged up the slope and, after an initial repulse, succeeded in throwing the Austrians off the ridge. A bloody seesaw battle ensued as French and Hapsburg regiments tore at one another in the dank woods. The Austrians attacked with great bravery @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their superiors in small unit tactics ; the white-coated battalions were gradually pushed back. Moreover, the balance of numbers slowly began to tilt against Hohenzollern. Although outnumbered at first, by midafternoon Davout probably had 25,000 Frenchmen opposing 17,000 Austrians. Hohenzollern, the last of his own reserves used up, sent a desperate call for help. His plea went unanswered. Charles, with the " general reserve " of 12,000 grenadiers, was less than two miles away, but he seemed reluctant to act. He neither committed his reserve nor attempted to coordinate the actions of Hohenzollern and Rosenberg. Nor, for that matter, did he recall his right flank column, Prince Johann von Liechtenstein 's reinforced I Reserve Corps, which was lethargically making its way toward Eggmuhl. Finally, at about 5 p.m., he sent a single battalion of grenadiers to support the battered III Corps. The feeble attack of this lone unit was easily repelled just before a tremendous downpour brought the day 's battle to an end. While Hohenzollern and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ come into contact with the French. On this flank, Charles ' brother, Archduke Ludwig, with the V and II Reserve corps had closed up to the east bank of the Abens River. To connect Ludwig 's command with Hohenzollern 's, two small detachments were drawn from the III Corps : one at Bachl under Brig. Gen. Josef von Pfanzelter ; the other, commanded by Brig. Gen. Ludwig Thierry, with detachments at Kirchdorf and Gaden. Pfanzelter spent an uneventful day, but Thierry spotted Bavarian troops east of Abensburg " ready to push toward Regensburg " and decided to attack them immediately. This was the Bavarian 1st Division, which was following Napoleon 's instructions to establish a firm link to Davout. " Tell the Bavarians what I expect of them, " the emperor had written to Lefebvre that morning, adding, " you understand the urgency of the situation. " Thierry and the Bavarians had a hot little fight that ended with the Austrians retiring toward Offenstetten in a rather disordered state. Photograph @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ on crushing the French III Corps, but by the end of the day the initiative had passed to Napoleon Bonaparte 's hands. Opposite below : April 22 saw the French and their allies relentlessly attacking the Austrians around Eggmuhl. Below : Napoleon arrives to address the Bavarian troops before their advance an April 20, in an illustration by F. de Myrbach. Photograph Right : Tactically able but strategically slow, Archduke Charles Louis John of Austria, portrayed by Anton Einsle, threw away a golden opportunity to destroy Napoleon 's army in detail. Below right : French Marshal Francois Lefebvre commanded the Bavarian VII Corps of Napoleon 's army. // Farther south and west, Oudinot overpowered a detachment of Hitler 's VI Corps at Pfaffenhofen as Massena drove his men east by forced marches toward Landshut. The bulk of Hitler 's troops, however, had moved up to Mainburg by evening. By April 19, therefore, the preconditions for Napoleon 's subsequent operations had been established : Davout had been linked to Lefebvre, the center of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Abens, Massena was en route to the Isar and the initiative was rapidly swinging to the French. The Hapsburg host and its commander, on the other hand, were badly shaken. The grand hopes of the previous day had evaporated, replaced by resurrected memories of past defeats. Charles had lost his best opportunity to beat the French in detail, and his left wing had been roughly handled. Worst of all, interrogations of French prisoners revealed that Napoleon had reached the battlefield. The archduke 's dispositions began to evince a decidedly defensive posture. April 20 opened with an attack by the Bavarian Ist Division, supported on the right by a pair of Wurttemberg light battalions. Directed from Abensburg due east toward Thierry 's position at Offenstetten, the attack was intended to connect with that of Marshal Jean Lannes ' provisional corps, which was driving through Bachl to Rohr. Before the damp and shivering Bavarian infantrymen began their advance, however, their officers drew them up in formation to hear a speech from the small @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ officers translated, Napoleon extolled the glory of their kingdom and assured them of his trust in their valor. " I have complete faith in your bravery, " he said. " Bavarians! This war shall be the last you fight against your enemies. Attack them with the bayonet and destroy them! " A young artillery lieutenant, straining to hear the translated words, recalled that " every eye shone with the purest, most unmistakable joy, the certainty of an imminent victory. " Even Bavaria 's Crown Prince Ludwig, hardly an admirer of Napoleon, was unable to contain his enthusiasm : " Could it have been otherwise than that the enemy, whom we instantly attacked, was thrown out of his strong positions? " The impact of this fiery address was increased by the extra ration of beer distributed at its conclusion and drunk with gusto " from kettles and casseroles, " as a simple artillery drummer remembered. The well-conducted Bavarian attack that followed this speech was completely successful, and Thierry 's little brigade @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the two allied columns and destroyed. The Bavarian infantry remained at Bachl for the night while the French continued through Rohr to the Laaber River at Rottenburg, where they were halted by Hitler 's men, moving up the stream from Mainburg. On the allied right, Bavarian Maj. Gen. Carl von Wrede 's 2nd Division and Vandamme 's VIII( Wurttemberg) Corps were coming into action. The Wurttemberg troops had also been treated to a dramatic Napoleonic address. " I am alone in your midst with no Frenchmen about me, " the emperor told them, " This is an unparalleled honor for you.... I have never turned my back on the enemy, and I shall certainly not do so today. In one month we shall be in Vienna! " Just as receptive to Napoleon 's words and presence as the Bavarians had been, the Wurttembergers responded with cheers and attacked with vigor. Combining with Wrede 's men, they pushed Archduke Ludwig off the heights above the Abens and threw him back some nine miles @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ charge. By the first dark hours of the 21 st, therefore, the Austrian left wing had been severely battered. Napoleon, believing he had defeated the main Austrian force and achieved a " second Jena, " was ready to resume the pursuit at dawn. Charles, utterly ignorant of the disaster on his left, swung his III Corps back toward the Laaber so that his main line now ran almost north to south from Regensburg to Leierndorf. Davout was content to follow this movement, and no serious fighting occurred. Unfortunately for Napoleon, the 20th also saw the fall of Regensburg. Its garrison, Colonel Louis-Francois Coutard 's 65th Line Regiment, surrendered when threatened by Liechtenstein from the south and part of the Austrian II Corps from the north. The colonel attempted to explain his situation to the stem Davout that evening : " the fine conduct of my regiment does nothing to soothe the chagrin of my awkward position ; I beg Your Excellency to grant me a word of consolation. " The locus of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the bewildered Austrian left to Landshut. While he led Lannes ' corps and a host of cavalry south on the road from Rottenburg, Vandamme and Wrede pushed toward the Isar along the Pfeffenhausen route. Desperate fighting by the Austrian rear guard delayed the allies briefly, but the Hapsburg troops were soon scattered, and French grenadiers stormed a burning bridge into Landshut itself. Leading the way, at the head of the grenadiers of the 3rd Battalion of the 17th Line Infantry, was one of Napoleon 's aides, General de Division Georges Mouton. " My sheep mouton is a lion! " exclaimed the emperor. Hiller beat a hasty retreat to Neumarkt, making better time than he had during his advance a week earlier, but delays on the part of Massena 's command limited the scope of the French victory. The veteran marshal had arrived on Hiller 's left, south of the Isar, in the early afternoon, but his subordinates had initially refrained from launching a determined attack into the Austrian flank, and the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the north, the day had seen Davout push south to the Laaber, link with Deroy 's 3rd Bavarian Division and drive northeast toward Schierling. That village duly fell to the allies, but the rest of the day was spent pinning the Austrians in place. Napoleon had been convinced that the force fleeing before him was the main Austrian army, but at about 2 a.m. on the 22nd, fresh messages from Davout opened his eyes to the real Hapsburg dispositions. He consequently issued orders for the bulk of the army to head north immediately. In a letter to Davout, he wrote, " I have decided to exterminate the army of Prince Charles today or at the latest tomorrow. " By dawn, a long column of muddy figures was surging up the Regensburg highway from Landshut, while Marshal Jean-Baptiste Bessieres pursued Hiller. The crack Wurttemberg Light Brigade led the main body, reaching and storming the tiny village of Eggmahl in midafternoon as the rest of the army deployed on the heights south of the Laaber. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Rosenberg 's IV Corps on the hills to north and gave the signal for a general advance. Photograph Left : Although initially outnumbered and isolated, French Marshal Louis Nicholas Davout 's III Corps fended off a series of poorly coordinated Austrian attacks throughout April 19. Below left : Marshal Jean Lannes-shown typically leading from the front during the storming of Regensburgcommanded a provisional corps of two divisions at the battles of Abensburg and Eggmuhl. Photograph Although the Battle of Eggmuhl on April 22 amounted to little more than a fighting retreat for the Austrians, Napoleon failed to fulfill his promise to " exterminate the army of Prince Charles today or at the latest tomorrow. " He had, however, completely turned the tables on his attackers in a campaign that would carry him to Vienna on May 13. // Davout instantly sent his men against the Austrian right, while Lannes threw his two divisions across the stream at Rosenberg 's left. In the center, a mass of nearly 7,000 allied horsemen pressed toward the key to Rosenberg 's position, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ battalions resisted bravely, but their situation was hopeless, and as the Bavarian, French and Wurttemberg cavalry overran his central battery, Rosenberg ordered a rapid retreat. The jubilant allies rapidly took up the pursuit. French cuirassiers and Wurttemberg light horse crushed a Hapsburg mounted brigade at Alteglofsheim as the moon rose. The chase was eventually brought to a halt by darkness, French exhaustion and Austrian reserves( the II Corps had eventually been brought south of the Danube that morning). Charles had little choice but to continue the withdrawal the next morning. The final act of the drama unfolded on April 23, as Charles attempted to extricate his army from the trap south of the Danube. An enormous cavalry struggle surged back and forth across the fields outside Regensburg that morning as horsemen of the Austrian II Corps sacrificed themselves to gain time for the rest of the army to escape across the river, losing 5,011 men, 197 horses and eight guns. " They covered themselves with glory, " Charles said of his troopers @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Lannes ' and Davout 's men, Archduke Charles managed to get most of his troops across the river safely, destroying the bridges behind him and retreating toward the Bohemian mountains. The roughly 2,000 French casualties that day included three generals killed and Napoleon himself, who had been grazed in the heel by a musket ball. The opening phase of the 1809 campaign thus came to a close with a dramatic but partial victory for Napoleon. The Austrian army had not been exterminated, as he hoped it would be, but had escaped to fight another day. Indeed, the dreadful slaughters at Aspern and Wagram can be said to have had their beginnings in Napoleon 's failure to crush Charles after Eggmahl. On the positive side of the ledger, however, within seven days of reaching the theater of operations, Napoleon had evicted Charles from Bavaria, inflicted nearly 45,000 casualties on the Hapsburg army and seized 73 of its guns at a cost of some 16,000 French and German losses. Forging order out Berthier 's chaos, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a triumphant note. Napoleon did not follow the retreating Austrians after Regensburg, but drove straight for Vienna and entered the Hapsburg capital on May 13, fulfilling the promise he had made to his Wurttemberg troops on April 20. Two months and two horrific battles later, the 1809 campaign concluded with another humiliating Austrian defeat. It was Charles ' last independent command and the French emperor 's last unqualified success. To read more about Napoleon 's brilliant Aus10 trian campaign, go to TheHistoryNet at www. thehistorynet.com and see " Battle at Floodtide, " by David Johnson, which will appear beginning the week of March 26, 2001. Author Affiliation John H. Gill is a U.S. Army lieutenant colonel stationed in Washington, D.C. This article is adapted from his recent book, With Eagles to Glory : Napoleon and His German Allies in the 1809 Campaign. For additional reading, he recommends : Napoleon and the Archduke Charles, by F.L. Petre ; and Crisis on the Danube, by James Arnold. // <p> 
