4083241 Celebrate Hanukkah with festive traditional cookies that take a fraction of the usual time to make. We use a food processor to blend a less sticky dough, eliminating hours of chilling. Instead of rolling the dough into a perfect round and cutting it into wedges( a tough job), we shape an easy rectangle and form it into a log to slice. And we do it all between sheets of waxed paper -- saving you cleanup time, too. Raspberry Rugelach Active time 30 minutes Total time 1 hour 15 minutes plus cooling Makes 1 dozen ReciTip Vary these cookies by using apricot or sour cherry jam and chopped walnuts. c. cold butter or margarine( 1 stick) 4 oz. cold cream cheese 1 c. all-purpose flour, plus additional for rolling tsp. salt c. seedless raspberry jam c. pecans, toasted and chopped 1. Preheat oven to 350F. 2. In food processor with knife blade attached, pulse butter and cream cheese until smooth and fluffy, occasionally scraping bowl with rubber spatula. Add flour and salt, and pulse until well combined. 3. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ paper. On work surface, flour 2 sheets. With rubber spatula, transfer half of dough onto each sheet. With hands, shape each mound of dough into a rectangle. Flour dough and lay another sheet of waxed paper on top of each. 4. With rolling pin, roll 1 piece of dough into 10 " by 9 " rectangle, occasionally reflouring dough to prevent sticking. Repeat with second piece of dough. Transfer dough rectangles, still on waxed paper, to large cookie sheet and freeze 5 minutes or until just firm. 5. Carefully peel off top sheet of waxed paper from 1 dough rectangle. Spread half of jam in even layer over dough. Sprinkle half of pecans evenly over jam. 6. Starting from one long end, roll dough tightly into log, peeling off bottom sheet of waxed paper as you roll. Gently press edge to seal dough. Freeze 5 minutes or until firm. Repeat with remaining dough. 7. Line large cookie sheet with parchment paper. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Place pieces, upright, on cookie sheet 1 inch apart. 8. Bake 40 to 45 minutes or until golden brown. Cool completely on wire rack. Store in airtight container, with waxed paper between layers, at room temperature up to 3 days or in freezer up to 1 month. EACH COOKIE About 140 calories, 2 g protein, 13 g carbohydrate, 9 g total fat( 5 g saturated), 1 g fiber, 21 mg cholesterol, 95 mg sodium. Photograph : PHOTOGRAPH BY KATE MATHIS. FOOD STYLING BY MICHAEL PEDERSON. PROP STYLING BY MARCUS HAY FOR **25;3949;TOOLONG 
