4052141 A n acquaintance of mine recently upgraded to a larger boat. Because he had little experience handling a craft of its size, he signed up for a course at a boat-handling school. He returned from the course full of praise for the school and the expertise of his instructor. Yet when his own boat was delivered, this skipper still felt overwhelmed at the wheel. This did n't surprise me ; I 've heard laments like this from other friends. Now, I am a believer in hands-on experience under the tutelage of an instructor, but I also know at some point you 're going to be on your own - just you and the boat. When that time comes, you can follow a simple procedure designed to make it easier to get familiar with your new ride. The getting- to-know-your-boat process begins at the dock. If you have n't personally secured the boat in its slip, undo the lines from the dockside pilings or cleats as well as from aboard. The boat does n't have to be unsecured at any time - you can free @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ you become more familiar with how your boat should be tied up. For instance, no matter how much force is exerted from any particular direction, the lines should take the strain rather than the fenders. Fenders should never be the sole means of protection for the hull. Next, wander up to the bow and then back to the stern, and yank on each of the lines secured to the cleats. Watch how the boat reacts. Does it " kiss " the fenders, then spring back on the lines( as it should), or does it cause the fenders to take most of the strain and ride up on the dock? If the boat is in a slip bordered by pilings, does the bow or stern nose up, unprotected, against the pilings? If so, reeling the boat to ensure the hull can not be endangered when a stiff breeze kicks up. Before leaving the dock, sit at the helm and observe the following : the direct route to the engine room @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and midship cleats. Practice accessing the engine room ; this is something you 'll want to be able to do quickly and efficiently in case of an emergency. While you 're in the engine room, open and close all the seacocks to become familiar with the locations of these valves and their resistance levels. You should also feel the engine belts for wear, loose fibers or roughness. If the belts are new, get familiar with how they feel. This way, upon subsequent examination, you 'll have a point of comparison. Upon returning to the helm, determine if anything is blocking your line of sight to the cleats. Ideally, you want to be able to direct the crew 's line handling from the helm chair. Not all boats are set up that way, though. If that 's the case, practice smoothly moving from the helm to the place where you have clear sightlines. Next, go through your usual startup procedure( blowers, etc.), then turn on the engines @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ they are warming, go back to the engine compartment. Observe the movement of the belts and how they appear when they are operating normally. Usually there is some fluctuation. If you know how they look when operating normally, you will recognize abnormalities when they occur. Back at your normal driving position, put each engine in gear. Get familiar with the detent when you move the throttles from forward to neutral and reverse. Observe the boat 's actions in relation to the lines at idle speed, first with one engine in gear and then with both engines in gear. Put engines in neutral and slowly increase rpm until you are running at what would be cruising speed. Knowing the lines are secure, go to the engine room and quickly observe the engine while it 's running at cruise mode. Get familiar with the normal engine room odors. If there is ever a problem upon subsequent inspections, you 'll quickly note unusual smells, like mat of leaking antifreeze solution or of burning wires. After @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ At this point, if you 're feeling comfortable, you can cast lines and prepare to head out into the stream. Once clear, allow the boat to drift, then kick it into gear and swing the bow into the wind/current, observing how much " set " occurs until you have complete control. Do this under varying conditions. That awareness will come in handy when shaping up for a landing or maneuvering while waiting for a bridge - particularly applicable for displacement and semi-displacement cruisers. Planing-hull operators will get a feel for their boats by noting the variances in time to plane with up and down wind/current hole shots. Practice this with tabs tucked in at first. If trimming lower units, train your ear to recognize the sound when the boat is trimmed correctly. Be particularly aware of horizon loss while coming up on plane, as that blind spot forward can translate into a safety issue. By this time, you should feel one with your boat, which means it 's time to go for a @ @ @ @ @ 
