4025541 Almost from our opening day -- since May 1934, to be exact -- we 've covered hardball. But the game itself is timeless. As are the stories. JULY 1966 He was then thirty-nine, she was twenty-seven. They had been married in January of that year, 1954, despite disharmony in temperament and time : he was tired of publicity, she was thriving on it ; he was intolerant of tardiness, she was always late. During their honeymoon in Tokyo an American general had introduced himself and asked if, as a patriotic gesture, she would visit the troops in Korea. She looked at Joe. " It 's your honeymoon, " he said, shrugging, " go ahead if you want to. " She appeared on ten occasions before 100,000 servicemen, and when she returned she said, " It was so wonderful, Joe. You never heard such cheering. " " Yes I have, " he said. Gay Talese, " The Silent Season of a Hero " JUNE 1986 It seemed he never broke a bat at @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ clubhouse runway. If he failed at the plate he 'd scream at himself, " YOU GODDAMN FOOL! " and bash the cement, while the Sox in the dugout stared ahead with mute smiles. Once, after a third strike, he smashed the water pipe to the cooler with his bare fists. No one could believe it until the flood began. Richard Ben Cramer, " What Do You Think of Ted Williams Now? " SEPTEMBER 1972 Scowling, he strode through the children who had waited for him at the gate and alone he drove away, his face fixed in its contempt for destiny ; everything that he had proved through all those years was worthless to appease him ; nothing was ahead of him but the implacable duty of needing to prove everything all over again. Fuggin kids. Murray Kempton, " The Homecoming of Willie Mays " SEPTEMBER 1999 We watch him hoofing in the batter 's box like an angry bull, excavating the earth, twinkle-toeing a pile of it in circles like a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ He has a number of little tics and twitches -- cocks his head, messes with his sleeves -- as if being harassed by horseflies. Yet somewhere deep in those brown eyes, he is as calm as a northern pond waiting for ducks to land. In that place he is seeing things reflected before they actually happen, and then he makes them happen. Michael Paterniti, " The House That Thurman Munson Built " AUGUST 1945 Babe Ruth coached the East team in the Esquire All-American Boys ' Baseball Game in New York. They beat Ty Cobb 's West 5-4. JULY 2001 I shall make a pilgrimage.... I shall go to Florida -- to Treasure Island, Florida -- and see Zim. It shall be warm. We shall eat pancakes. We shall fish and play the ponies and warm our bones beneath the Florida sun. I shall sit at the calcified knobs that once were his knees and summon the courage to ask of Zim the question burning in my soul : Why does Joe @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, " Zimmer " AUGUST 1959 Fans came to Ruth. Celebrities came to Ruth. The world came to Ruth. Ruth went to no one, unless summoned. Roger Kahn, " The Real Babe Ruth " MARCH 1, 1978 Suddenly, all the demons were back. Martin, Munson, the relentless pressure and tension. Reggie watched silently. We waited for the home runs. They were on. The two shots to right field. The crowd going crazy. The third swing, the ball landing in the bleachers. Reggie running around the bases, holding up a clenched fist. Stepping out of the dugout to doff his cap to the standing, cheering crowd. Photograph : A defiant Jackson, by David Levine. I looked over at Reggie sitting on the couch. There was not the hint of a smile on his face. Philip Taubman, " Reggie Looks Back in Anger " 
