4083841 Classic Fried Catfish MAKES 6 TO 8 SERVINGS HANDS-ON TIME : 20 MIN. TOTAL TIME : 8 HR., 20 MIN. For an extra-crispy crust, use stoneground yellow cornmeal, if available. Serve with lemon slices and your favorite tartar sauce. The secret to this recipe is maintaining an oil temperature of 360 to ensure a crispy, golden crust. 1 cups buttermilk tsp. hot sauce 6( 4- to 6-oz.) catfish fillets 1/3 cup plain yellow cornmeal 1/3 cup masa harina( corn flour) 1/3 cup all-purpose flour 2 tsp. salt 1 tsp. ground black pepper 1 tsp. ground red pepper tsp. garlic powder Peanut oil 1. Whisk together buttermilk and hot sauce. 2. Place catfish in a single layer in a 13- x 9-inch baking dish ; pour buttermilk mixture over fish. Cover and chill 8 hours, turning once. 3. Combine cornmeal and next 6 ingrethents in a shallow dish. 4. Let fish stand at room temperature 10 minutes. Remove from buttermilk mixture, allowing excess todripofF. Dredge fish in cornmeal mixture, shaking off excess. 5 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ large, deep cast-iron or heavy-duty skillet ; heat to 360. 6. Fry fish, in batches, 2 minutes on each side or until golden brown. Transfer to a wire rack on a paper towel-lined jelly-roll pan. Keep warm in a 225 oven until ready to serve. * All-purpose flour or plain yellow cornmeal maybe substituted. Crispy Oven-Fried Catfish MAKES 4 SERVINGSHANDS-ON TIME : 15 MIN. TOTAL TIME : 45 MIN. Cornflakes are the secret to a crisp baked coating. Serve with sauted mixed veggies, such as squash, zucchini, and carrots, anda green salad. Test Kitchen secret : Foran extra touch of heat, add a few drops of your favorite hot sauce to the buttermilk before chilling the fillets. 1 cup low-fat buttermilk 4( G-oz.) catfish fillets 1 to 2 tsp. Creole seasoning 3 cups cornflakes cereal, crushed Vegetable cooking spray Lemon wedges 1. Place buttermilk in a large zip-top plastic freezer bag ; add catfish, turning to coat. Seal and chill 20 minutes, turning once @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ fish from buttermilk, discarding buttermilk. Sprinkle fish with Creole seasoning. 4. Place crushed cornflakes in a shallow dish. 5. Dredge ftsh in cornflakes, pressing cornflakes gently onto each fillet. Place fish on a wire rack coated with cooking spray in a roasting pan. 6. Bake at 425 " for 30 to 35 minutes or until fish flakes with a fork. Serve immediately with lemon wedges. Note : We tested with Tony Chachcrc 's Original Creole Seasoning. SEND US YOUR RECIPE! Updated your mom 's classic recipe? Or want us to give your favorite childhood recipe a makeover? If so, send it to : " Mama 's Way or Your Way? " c/o Southern Living. 21Ou La keshore Drive, Birmingham, AL 35209 or stfoodedStistimeinc.com. 
