2015441 Among the limited news items in the January 1848 California Star was a heartening report by a local physician, Dr. Victor Fourgeaud. " We have one of the most healthful territories on the continent, with a climate unrivaled in purity and equability, " said the enthusiastic medic. " Nor is sickness, that scourge of humanity, here to harass and hinder us in our pursuits, though some portions of Sacramento and San Joaquin are subject to bilious remittent intermittent fevers.... Wjounds heal here with astonishing rapidity, owing, it is supposed... to the extreme purity of the atmosphere. " The busy physician had been asked by the newspaper editor to write a few words about the health of the small San Francisco community. He was unaware that another news item in the same edition would change his life drastically almost overnight and almost equally affect the few thousand settlers in the San Francisco Bay region. The item was short and simple, saying in effect : " John Marshall, a mill hand, has found some gold at a sawmill on the South Fork of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ " Perhaps Dr. Fourgeaud worried whether he had downplayed some disturbing reports he had received from front-line settlers and ranchers in the Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys, both about 100 miles inland from the Pacific Coast. A number of recurrent dreadful fevers had occurred in the valleys, and they resisted treatment. The physician had been told that many of the victims screamed with pain, complaining of severe headaches, and that many became delirious and seemingly lost their sense of reason during the height of their symptoms. There was very little in the frontier physician 's textbooks to tell him how to treat such a vexing and puzzling ailment. In a few months, Dr. Fourgeaud and the few other medics in Northern California would have their quiet and peaceful way of life violently disrupted and would have little time for medical reflections. Reports of gold on the American River soon spread round the world, and the news caught the attention of thousands of adventurers anxious for a change of scene, riches, and a new way of life. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ numbers-at least 120,000 men, some mere boys not yet into their teens. Most were men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five ; wives and children accompanied only a few. They came by covered wagon over the plains and through the great desert country of the Far West. Hundreds succumbed to malnutrition and scurvy, and many contracted cholera as they traveled when they drank contaminated milk and water. Most arrived by clipper, either coming around Cape Horn( a passage that took weeks from New England ports to San Francisco) or by vessels that sailed to the Panama Isthmus. There, passengers were told to cross through the swamps and meet ships waiting on the Pacific Coast side. The isthmus was a steaming jungle, filled with swarms of insects, some of which had never been seen before. There was no protection against them, particularly the mosquitoes. Everyone was bitten, and thousands became seriously ill with malaria or yellow fever. Just as many came down with food-borne ills, such as dysentery and cholera @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. These were lumped into a category called Panama Fever. Among this group was a strange recurrent fever referred to as brain fever. It was called this because victims lost their sense of reason. Within weeks hundreds of ships glutted San Francisco Harbor, discharging their human cargos, now being called " forty-niners. " These travelers hurried the one hundred miles to Sacramento by wagon train, coach, or on foot, and right behind them came a concerned Dr. Fourgeaud, who knew an epidemic was coming. He had seen the countless sick, most of whom needed hospitalization. But the greed for gold pushed them on in their search for treasure. At Sacramento, Dr. Fourgeaud quickly opened an office at Fifth and J Streets and met with the physicians in town to map out a program of medical procedure. He was dismayed when worried colleagues told him that they had several cases of smallpox. He felt that the new multitudes would overwhelm the facilities of their small town along the Sacramento River. Sacramento was the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ point into the gold-laden hills. In 1849, there were probably fewer than 15,000 Yankees in all of Northern California. The Spanish aristocrats who owned most of the ranchlands numbered only a few hundred ; the Indians could not be properly counted, but their number likely matched the influx of Americans until gold was discovered. There was also a society of padres. Most physicians in California had been recent participants in the Mexican War of 1846 and had chosen to remain in California territory when the war ended. It was a difficult journey to return to New England or other areas east of the Mississippi where most had come from. The land along the vast Pacific Coast was rich and productive. It promised a happy existence. Many medical orderlies were also discharged from the army, and they followed their medical officers into Northern California. A few began to call themselves physicians when they found that anyone could open a medical office in the Far West. Settlers took a man at his word, so no one challenged a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. Many forty-niners swept into the gold regions of the Sierra Nevada foothills and discovered to their dismay that seeking gold was a tedious and often unrewarding venture. They returned to Sacramento exhausted, discouraged, and frequently ill. The forty-niners came back from the hills with a variety of mountain and valley fevers. To house them and treat them, the city of Sacramento established hospitals-then known as pest houses. However, there was much more to worry about than the treatment of the sick and their diseases. The miners had dug into thousands of streams in the hills, dislodging gravel that swept into the large Sacramento River. This raised the floor of the stream so much that each winter, destructive flooding occurred. The great and sudden flood of January 8, 1850-one of the first of the disasters-was among the worst. A huge wall of water rushed downriver and into Sacramento, drowning many who were living in tents at the time. The Sacramento City Hospital was also swept away by the flood. The survivors were @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ from the pressure of the water. Finally, those who remained were taken to a private hospital owned by Drs. J.D. Stillman and John F. Morse. On January 11, 1850, Dr. Stillman opened his notebook and took a few moments to report what was happening to the forty-niners. " We are all, about forty of us, " he wrote, " in the upper story of our hospital... a few patients muttering in delirium. A lone woman, sick and destitute, is curtained off in one corner of the room. " The following day, he made another entry : " The water is still rising-at the rate of six inches an hour. Tents, houses, boxes, barrels, horses, mules, and cattle are sweeping by with the swollen torrent. " I have some misgivings about our fate, but sure I am that we will not desert the sick. If we are swept away, we will go together. " However, Dr. Stillman survived and went on to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ and numerous other doctors. During the 185Os one pioneer merchant, admiring the work done by the valiant physicians serving Northern California, wrote : " The physicians did noble work ; no danger appalled them. Night and day they responded to the call of distress, scarcely pausing to snatch a few hours of needed rest and sleep. Remedies( during an early flood) were down to calomel and quinine. " Dr. Fourgeaud finally realized that his dream of a quiet and restful life as a practicing physician was an impossibility because of the influx of the forty-niners. Historical records show that he was busy in practice as late as August 1863. He had, by then, already seen the city of Sacramento establish a Board of Health, one of the first in the nation. He knew that his efforts and those of other practitioners had helped encourage the building of levees to hold back annual floods. Toward the end of the Gold Rush, Dr. Fourgeaud, as he had a few years before, began to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ their minds. Brain fever was a mystifying disease and hard to treat. It broke out in rural areas. The victim usually developed a very high fever, muscle tremors, and then went into a coma. Dr. Fourgeaud and other medics were aware that the disease seemed more prevalent among those who handled horses, but neither he nor the other doctors could go beyond that observation. Treating victims of brain fever as best he could, Dr. Fourgeaud could not envision that the disease would, in the twentieth century, be named encephalitis. Doctors then would determine that it was spread by the bite of the mosquito, which carried the disease from infected horses and from sick wild birds. Today, of course, much is known about the once-mysterious brain fever : how to control it and how to treat it. Realizing that modern medicine still considers encephalitis a serious threat, one must express admiration for men such as Dr. Fourgeaud and his associates. They fought valiantly against disease, wounds, and the hazards of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ helped heal hundreds of seriously ill forty-niners and prevented the spread of plague and medical disaster. Many of the diseases they treated, such as encephalitis, remained a mystery to them, but by using their limited resources, they usually saved their patients ' lives. These medics did not seek gold at a time when it seemed readily available. They sought to relieve the suffering of the forty-niners. That success was the only reward they wanted. <p> 
