4073641 Journalist and historian Riefe At- kinson knows the face of battle far better than most who write about wars and those who fight them. The son of a career Army officer, At- kinson grew up on posts in Europe and the United States. In 1982 his articles for The Kansas City Times on West Point 's Class of 1966 won the Pulitzer Prize for national reporting, and in 1983 he joined The Washington Post. As the paper 's Berlin bureau chief, he covered the conflicts in Somalia and Bosnia and was the Post 's lead Gulf War reporter. Atkinson took a ieave of absence from the newspaper in 1999 to begin work on the three-volume World War 11 history known as the Liberation Trilogy ; the first volume won the Pulitzer Prize for history in 2003. He briefly returned to the Post that year and again in 2007 to cover combat operations in Iraq. Atkinson is working on the trilogy 's final volume. What was the genesis of the Liberation Trilogy? World War II did n't start on Omaha Beach, and I recognized at some point there @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Europe. The first panel was North Africa, the second was Sicily and Italy, and the third and final panel was the decisive campaign in Central Europe. I realized the story of World War II is bottomless, and we 'll never run out of things to write about. Why the focus on Europe rather than the Pacific? You might say I 've had a Europe orientation literally since birth. And I think the war in Europe just grabs my imagination in a different way. The European Theater works for me in terms of finding the narrative and the lyricism that comes from exploring a topic that really works on your imagination on a variety of levels. What struck you about North Africa and Italy? The events that unfolded beginning with Operation Torch in North Africa in 1942 and Operation Husky in Sicily in 1943 inform what happened in Normandy and beyond. North Africa, Sicily and Italy were absolutely essential to the Army 's development as an institution and to the development of the individuals I write about. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ he not gone through North Africa, Sicily and Italy. How important was a commander 's ego to his performance in Europe? Ego is inseparable from any human enterprise, and war probably more so than most. When you talk about coalition warfare on a global scale, you find that most of the successful practitioners tend to be able to check their egos at the door. That does n't mean a general ca n't be both flamboyant and successful - look at George Patton. It 's the clashing of egos, the insecurities, the effort to get diverse personalities to mesh and the capacity for growth, or lack thereof, that really intrigue me. Who was the best combat leader in North Africa? In Italy? The two in North Africa that I admire are Terry Alien, commander of the 1st Infantry Division, and Charles " Doc " Ryder, commander of the 34th Division. Both were very competent. They were both professional officers who were excellent practitioners of the combat arts. In Sicily and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, commander of the 3rd Infantry Division and then VI Corps, who was a truly superb combat leader. But the best tactician in Italy was n't American, he was General Alphonse Juin, who commanded the French Expeditionary Corps attached to the U.S. Fifth Army. He stands out as extraordinarily gifted. I 'd go so far as to say Juin was better than any of the British or American commanders. Who was the most overrated combat leader in each theater? In North Africa, Fd have to say Patton. He was only in command of II Corps for about six weeks, and though legend has it that he revived II Corps ' fortunes and turned it into a highly competent, war-winning unit, it 's just not true. He was quite frustrated, he made mistakes, and he left after his six weeks feeling a mixture of satisfaction and disgruntlement. He had n't performed as well as he thought he should have. And as much as I admire him for what he later did as supreme @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the most overrated in Italy. He was only there as theater commander through December 1943, when he left for England to prepare for Operation Overlord, but he was not a particularly good field marshal. When we invaded Sicily in July 1943, there was n't really a good plan for what would happen 20 miles beyond the beaches, because Eisenhower had n't been attentive to the notion of sever- ing the Messina Straits that separate Sicily from mainland Italy. As a result, four very fine German divisions got away almost intact because, frankly, Eisenhower and his immediate subor- donates - particularly General Sir Harold Alexander - simply had n't been paying sufficient attention. Which was the most important battle in North Africa? In Italy? In both cases, the first battles were the most important. In North Africa, the landings in Morocco and Algiers were critical. If they had n't succeeded, nothing else could have happened. The landings were a novel enterprise, one of the boldest operations of the war. In @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Sicily had to be successful for anything else to work. And the subsequent landings on the Italian mainland were also important. Salerno was a very near-run thing ; General Mark Clark very nearly got his 5th Army thrown back into the sea. Had that happened, it would have been a monumental setback, so the success in those landings was absolutely vital. Is there really more to say about the Normandy invasion? First, I think it 's important to assert that the story is bottomless, in that there will always be more to write about Normandy. The U.S. Army 's records pertaining to World War II - just the Army 's - weigh 17,000 tons. So, if you 're an " archive rat, " as I am, you 'll always be able to find new and interesting aspects to even as oft-told a tale as Normandy. And I also believe I 'm writing one book that just happens to come in three parts, and it begins in November 1942, and Normandy is an iteration @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ but I think those who are picking up the story from the beginning and understand how it fits in to the earlier campaigns will find that there are still revelations. How difficult is it to research these long-ago events? I find that while trying to reconstruct something that happened 60-plus years ago is sometimes incredibly frustrating, it 's often not as difficult as we might think, given that the Second World War has to be the most recorded and scrutinized real-time event in our national history. And while secondary sources such as the official histories are very important, there needs to be a thrust toward originality in voice and in material. Frankly, at least half the fun of this process is rooting around in the archival sources. Having now been doing this for more than a decade, I have a pretty good feeling for archives large and small, both in this country and around the world. There is a staggering amount of material, so you do n't need latter-day oral histories, because the contemporaneous record is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ as both journalist and historian? In the past 10 years I 've been back to The Washington Post twice - once to go to Iraq for the invasion and again in 2007 for six months. But I think I 've made the transition to historian. I 'm not sure what I 'll do when the trilogy is done in 2012 or 2013, but I 'm sure I 'll find something to keep myself out of trouble. For the full interview with Rick Atkinson, visit Military History online www. historynet.com/ militaryhistory. 
