2021841 Paul Strand long has been recognized as among this nation 's most important 20th-century photographers, one of a group of writers, poets, critics, cultural historians, and artists who came of age during World War I, foretelling the birth of a new American culture. However, the full extent of his accomplishments and contribution, not just to the history of photography, but to modern art, has not been appreciated fully. Since the last U.S. retrospective of his work in 1971 at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Strand has been known primarily through reproductions, which do not indicate truthfully the range of his stunning craftsmanship. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, many previously unknown images were discovered, including early abstractions and studies of New York. They reveal Strand 's thorough understanding of the latest developments in European and American art as well as his ability to translate this knowledge into the medium of photography, as seen in pictures taken during 1916 such as " Porch Shadows, " " Bowls, " and " Chair. " Unlike many other U.S. craftsmen @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ not simply adopt the look of European art, but was able to transform it into something that was uniquely his own and distinctly American. Strand 's photographs also evocatively illustrate his lifelong quest to reveal, as he wrote, " the essential character of a place and its people, " not through a country 's obvious symbols of grandeur, monumentality, or power, but in the telling details of its people, landscape, and architecture. Strand was born in 1890 in New York and attended the Ethical Culture School. Alfred Stieglitz, the renowned photographer widely celebrated for introducing modernist art to the American public, recognized the young Strand 's talent and gave him a one-man show at the 291 Gallery in New York in 1916. Through images taken in 1915 -- such as " Wall Street, New York " and " Fifth Avenue. New York " -- Strand portrayed a city in which the physical environment of buildings and streets was as vibrant as the people who inhabited it. After World War I, during @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Charles Sheeler on the film " Manhatta, " an attempt to capture, as Strand wrote, New York 's " power and beauty and movement. " In the turbulent 1930s, Strand 's noncommercial movies often had a social message. " The Wave, " produced for the government of Mexico, depicted the struggles of the Indians to be paid decent wages. While president of Frontier Films, a nonprofit educational motion-picture group, he worked intensively on " Native Land, " a film based on the denial of civil liberties to labor activists during that decade. The money Strand earned as a freelance cameraman throughout the 1920s and 1930s enabled him to make still photographs in his spare time. Beginning in 1920, he shot a series of pictures of his wife, Rebecca. Although the portraits were close-ups, there is a respectful distance between the photographer and the subject. In this way, Strand allowed his wife to project her personality, rather than imposing himself or his understanding of her onto the image. This @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ " Blind Woman, New York, " " Alfred Stieglitz, " and " Mr. Bennett, Vermont. " Through the 1920s, Strand made close-up studies of plants and other nature forms. In many of these, nature assumes anthropomorphic forms, yet never is abstracted completely and always remains rooted in reality. In the same vein, he photographed architectural details and machine parts. Through the late 1920s and early 1930s, Strand pulled his camera back to encompass the larger physical, psychological, and historical relationships between people, objects, and their environment in his portraits of Mexico and New Mexico. During this time, he came to believe that art was not so much a form of personal temperament as of social expression. Some 106 of Strand 's images of 18th-century churches, town halls, cemeteries, weathered buildings, and even trees, rocks, and people, made in the 1940s, were incorporated with excerpts by early New England writers in the book, Time in New England, that he produced with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ grips with the profound and pervasive horrors of World War II, it created a dynamic portrait of the region that inspired and reflected the country 's traditional, yet enduring, values. Strand settled in France in the early 1950s. In his European photographs over the next two decades, he attempted to show " what is healthy and growing in society... stories of human victories, however small, in the struggle for social health and well-being. " He produced a series of books on France, the Italian village of Luzzara, the Outer Hebrides, and Egypt, in addition to photographing extensively in Morocco, Romania, and Ghana. Slowed down by ill health and poor eyesight, Strand eventually was unable to withstand the rigors of travel and turned to his garden at his home in Orgeval, France. The last images of this garden represented, as he wrote a few days before his death in 1976, another " expedition into the unknown. " A retrospective of Strand 's work, including approximately 150 photos @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ may be seen at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, from March 12 to May 15. The show, " Paul Strand : People and Place, " then will conclude its U.S. tour at the M.H. de Young Memorial Museum, San Francisco( June 14-Aug. 16). Ms. Ziska is a publicist with the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., where the exhibition, " Paul Strand : People and Place, " originated. <p> 
