4085241 CAPRICORN DECEMBER 23 - JANUARY 20 True friends show themselves early in the month, and you can rid yourself of old problems and start anew. Your eureka moments are revealed around the 18th, when your words cut to the chase and enlighten more people than you realize. From the 22nd, your home becomes your castle and great domestic plans roll out, but be sure to employ monetary caution. AQUARIUS JANUARY 21-FEBRUARY 19 The best career moves are behind the scenes, and amorous office liaisons are possible, but avoid giving out misleading signals. Being bold oils the wheels of work, love, and money, as do influential friends. Sensitive information requires discretion. Late in the month, intelligence invites success. PISCES FEBRUARY 20-MARCH 20 You are ripe for thrilling, unscripted change, and at the very least you seek and enjoy added novelty. Your boosted magnetism gives you everything to play with, but avoid overconfidence around the 11th. Later, be frank with others who upset you. The new year invites financial security and a professional bonus. ARIES MARCH @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ do n't let unfair criticism get to you. Remain dignified and trust that decisive career events will ultimately be advantageous. Prepare for a positive 2011, when life becomes richer and more expansive and last summer 's promises unfold. Special romantic travel plans can also emerge. TAURUS APRIL 21-MAY 21 Sparks of passion fly early in the month, and friends bring inspired opportunities. Around the 14th, abandon your cherished routine and satisfy a need for adventure, as new landscapes can give you a thrill. Do n't overreact if colleagues are not as on the ball as you are. Remember that you require rest and exercise. GEMINI MAY 22-JUNE 21 There are times for logic and times to listen to your heart. This month calls for the latter, but it 's your first-class brainpower that reaps financial rewards around the 18th. Later, your extra charms ignite feelings that may take you by surprise. A partner 's good fortune can be yours. Long-distance news proves uplifting. CANCER JUNE 22-JULY 23 The wisdom of others @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ note. Do n't retreat into your shell early and late in the month because you may miss out on real social connections. Though family obligations are important, they should not stifle you. Honest exchanges in relationships will help shape your future. LEO JULY 24-AUGUST 23 Now is the time to recognize your aspirations at the office and fulfill them. After the 22nd, you must be more adventurous and less resistant to change to follow your dreams. Lovers are sensitive now and may feel neglected, but they have to accept your need to shine out in the world, not just in their life. VIRGO AUGUST 24-SEPTEMBER 23 Let your hair down and get out your party gear, because it 's time for fun, not shyness. Your creative gifts need showcasing, and a conversation can be empowering around the 18th. Avoid negative people, and connect with only those who enhance your outlook. Your work ethic returns full-on late in the month. LIBRA SEPTEMBER 24-OCTOBER 23 Home and family require attention and maybe some @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, embrace it without resentment. It 's about investing in your long-term security right now, so build new foundations with patience and discipline. After the 22nd, partners, current or new, provide blessings. SCORPIO OCTOBER 24-NOVEMBER 22 No one can outwit your razor-sharp mind right now, and your charisma and looks are at their peak. This potent mix creates a mood that gets you results in matters of the heart. From the 22nd, your workplace becomes a source of good luck, while at home, only compromise can prevent spats. SAGITTARIUS NOVEMBER 23-DECEMBER 22 Though not your forte, financial prudence is worth considering, so use some downtime to review your accounts. Wise cash moves can be made midmonth, and domestic change, even if it 's sudden and unscripted, is liberating. Anticipate a period of romantic and creative fruitfulness. JANUARY PREDICTIONS BY LEIGH OSWALD Photograph : Blumarine necklace, $310. blumarine.com. <br> RICHARD MAJCHRZAK/STUDIO D 
