2124141 In his 30 years at Paris-based oil company Total, Jean-Noel Dairon has gathered a wealth of expertise in oil refining and marketing. But on a rainy Monday in October, the veteran executive shows up at the Hilton Hotel in Milan, Italy, with a rather different agenda : he has come to talk about business ethics. Dairon, 56, stands in front of 100 managers of the company 's Italian subsidiary and gets straight to the point. " Is this a new era of capitalism, " he asks provocatively, " or is it hypocrisy in action, a cynical response to the company 's critics? " Thus starts an ethics road show that Total, the world 's fourth largest oil company, has begun taking to its subsidiaries around the globe, from Angola to Belgium, with a stop in the U.S. this year. The mission is to drive home to managers everywhere that Total has a goal besides making money : it wants to become a better corporate citizen. That means being more responsible and responsive in the way it deals with the environment @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ with the governments and peoples of the countries in which it operates, including more than 40 in Africa. Bribery and leaky old tankers are out. Codes of conduct and wind energy are in. Closer to home, Total has begun conducting newfangled audits of some plants to identify ethical and social weak points. Across Europe, corporate social responsibility and sustainable development are hot trends that have spawned a fast-growing industry of consultants, accountants, and legal and. specialists. All but six of Britain 's top 100 companies now publish details of their environmental or social policies. Some firms, including Total 's European rivals Shell and BP, are even making ethics a focal point of their marketing. " Profits. Principles. Or Both? " reads the tag line in a series of recent Shell ads that advocate striking a balance between affordable energy and the social and environmental costs of providing it. The big question, as Dairon suggested, is whether all this marks a tangible change in the way corporations behave or whether @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ relations exercise designed to make firms appear more sensitive than they really are. Total, with sales of $125 billion, could certainly stand to burnish its image. Several former managers were just convicted in a sensational corruption case in France, and the company stands accused of using forced labor to build a gas pipeline in Myanmar, which it vigorously denies. Total 's image at home was especially sullied by a devastating oil spill that polluted some of France 's best-loved beaches. Total officials insist that, these incidents aside, their efforts to clean up and green up are both sincere and vital for the firm 's long-term health. The main reason : they 're feeling pressure from investors, not just activists. There 's a small but growing industry of politically correct stock funds in Europe, with an estimated $40 billion under management, that invest only in companies they consider socially responsible. " Investors want the best possible investment. Even if ethics is not their cup of tea, they consider companies that take into account @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Jean-Pierre Cordier, the senior Total executive in charge of the ethics drive. 
