2001041 FEATURES 50 Deer Hunting Yearbook The stories behind the biggest bucks of 2003, plus poaching busts, trivia. By Will Snyder 62 Fall Bass Secrets Hot tips from top pros put you in the action when the weather cools. By Homer Circle 70 Bear Guide Down Two hunters struggle to survive after their plane crashes off the Alaskan peninsula. By Christopher Batin 76 Early-Season Stands Mapping Out the Rut, Part I : The best places to ambush whitetails in the pre-rut. By Michael Hanback 78 Wise Guys Eight new tricks to learn from bucks who have seen it all. By Michael Hanback 84 Targeting the Gun Vote Politicians are courting the sportsmen 's vote, but which candidates can gun owners trust? By John B. Snow 88 Lewis and Clark : Down to the Sea Trail 's end in the Pacific Northwest is where adventure begins for sportsmen headed west. By Jim Low On the Cover 50 Special Deer-Hunting Yearbook : 2003 's Biggest Bucks! 78 8 Ways to Fool the Wisest Bucks 106 State-by-State Deer Forecast 76 Top Stand Setups for Pre-Rut Whitetails DEPARTMENTS 8 Editor 's Journal @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Your Mind Cougar comebacks ; busting poachers ; dumping on the Dems ; gun review suggestion 26 Ask the Experts How to find all the pellets in birds ; 6mm for varmints 28 Shooting A fool-proof, one-shot method for sighting-in By Jim Carmichel 32 Fishing Additions to lures increase action... and bites By Jerry Gibbs 36 Hunting How to make hunting pressure work in your favor By Jim Zumbo 40 Hunting Dogs Train your pointer to flush on command By Larry Mueller 43 Whitetails Four places sure to funnel bucks By Michael Hanback 44 Bowhunting Twenty-one days in the tracks of a record-book bull elk By Todd Kuhn 48 This Happened To Me! Man vs. bear in a footrace to safety 112 Do-It-Yourself Portable tent platform By Joseph Truini 116 Survival Basic tips for GPS navigation By Rich Johnson 128 Last Laugh Lewis and Clark according to Pat By Patrick F. McManus SNAP SHOTS 17 World 's Priciest Shotgunning How to shoot a fortune down the barrel of a 12-gauge 18 Cougar on the Move Radio-collared cougar travels nearly 700 miles across four state lines 20 Better @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ easier to catch than Northern and Florida strains 25 Thrill Killers Trigger-happy poachers are killing big game just for the " fun " of it SPORTING GEAR 94 Muzzleloader Match-Up Three new in-lines compete for top gun in OL 's field test By Ralph Lermayer 96 2004 's Deer Gear Hi-Beam headlamp, rattle bag, synthetic base layers, more By Frank Miniter and Michael Hanback 100 Gun Test Winchester Model 1885 Low-wall By Jim Carmichel DEER FORECAST : EAST Adventure Discovering smallmouth Heaven State-by-State Deer Forecast : Thriving deer populations promise a good season this fall Scouting Report Finding the remote areas Clear-cuts for bruiser bucks, woodcock and grouse DEER FORECAST : MIDWEST Adventure Wading for king salmon after dark State-by-State Deer Forecast : Shooting more does is part of the Midwest QDM plan Scouting Report First dove season for Minnesotans Early-season whitetails DEER FORECAST : SOUTH Adventure : Scaling cliffs for trophy trout State-by-State Deer Forecast : Shooting more does is part of the Southern QDM plan Scouting Report Study results on the best( and worst) Southern states in which to be a deer @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ grouse State-by-State Deer Forecast : A decent season is expected, despite drought conditions Scouting Report Hunting drought conditions Big Wyoming elk Best river fishing Illustration <p> 
