4179641 <h> NOBLE study shows superiority of CABG over PCI for treatment of left main coronary artery disease <p> Coronary artery bypass( CABG) surgery is the standard treatment for revascularization in patients with left main coronary artery( LMCA) disease, but use of percutaneous coronary intervention( PCI) for this indication is increasing. Findings from the Nordic-Baltic-British Left Main Revascularization Study( NOBLE) trial found that despite similar mortality, the five-year risk of major adverse events was higher after PCI compared to CABG for the treatment of unprotected LMCA disease. <p> Findings were reported today at the 28th annual Transcatheter Cardiovascular Therapeutics( TCT) scientific symposium. Sponsored by the Cardiovascular Research Foundation( CRF), TCT is the world 's premier educational meeting specializing in interventional cardiovascular medicine. The study was also published simultaneously in The Lancet. <p> The original primary endpoint was evaluation of non-inferiority of PCI to CABG assessed by MACCE at two years follow-up in the complete study cohort. Due to lower than expected endpoint rates, the primary endpoint assessment was ultimately changed to a median follow-up of three years. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of myocardial infarction and repeat revascularization in patients undergoing PCI compared to CABG are consistent with previous studies of coronary revascularization in patients with LMCA disease, " said Evald H. Christiansen, MD, PhD, lead researcher from Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby in Denmark. " However, the low mortality following treatment in both groups demonstrates that modern revascularization techniques can lead to excellent survival in stable LMCA patients. Further, the increased rates of non-procedural myocardial infarction, repeat revascularization and stroke associated with PCI are important considerations in selecting the optimal treatment for individual patients. " <p> News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. <p> This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. Find out more here. 
