2012941 Karen Fourcaudot knew her nine-year-old son, Garrett, was addicted to electronic games when he played so long that he developed blisters on his hand. But even then, he did n't stop. " He just moved his hand so that the joystick did n't actually rub on the blisters, and kept on playing. " When preteens spend hours looking at the screen, chances are they 're not word-processing or mastering spreadsheets. For children this age -- and let 's face it, many of them are boys -- one of the main attractions is games, whether they 're played on the family computer or using a video game set linked to the TV. What is it about these games that completely mesmerizes kids? Greg Fouts, a child psychologist and professor at the University of Calgary who studies the effects of media on child development, says simply, " Kids like to play them because they 're fun. They provide an intellectual challenge -- it 's exciting to figure out the strategy and solve the problems presented to them, and very satisfying when they beat @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ particular because they involve role-playing and fantasy, Fouts says. " Children this age project themselves right into the game. " At the same time, it is psychologically safe. " The child knows he 's just playing against a machine, so if he loses, it does n't hurt his self-esteem. He 's not going to be ridiculed or embarrassed by the computer, as he might be if he were competing with a real person and losing. " After interviewing lots of kids, Fouts has discovered another, not-so stellar attraction. " Many children say they are bored otherwise ; they say they do n't have much to do besides these games. Others say they have nobody to play with and that they like the games because they can play them alone. " Clearly there are some gaps in these children 's lives, says Fouts. " It may be that kids who are not socially skilled gravitate to these games, because it 's easier to play them than to improve their ability to make and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ do need to learn to develop friendships, play with others, negotiate, get along, share and all those other skills. They wo n't learn those things playing electronic games. " Another concern for Fouts is the content of the games. " The basic theme is usually " Might makes right. " The more people or aliens or monsters you destroy, the more likely you are to win. " The emphasis on power, competition and destruction is very unbalanced, he adds. And while kids do need to develop strategies to win the games, the strategies tend to be very linear, Fouts says. " Creative or divergent approaches are n't part of these games. " Fouts " biggest worry is the amount of time that computer or video games can take away from other activities. " A child who is playing games four hours a day is not reading, doing homework or spending time with friends during those hours. He 's not playing in the park or getting any exercise. The games @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 's life out of balance. " To check your own child 's balance, Fouts suggests asking yourself the following questions : - Are electronic games taking time away from other activities, such as sports? - Is your child 's desire to play interfering with family activities or outings? - Is it interfering with the amount of time he plays with other children? - Are you using these games as a babysitter? A " yes " to any of these questions might indicate that parents need to put some restrictions on game playing, and add other activities to the mix. " Parents should also talk to their children about what they are playing, " Fouts adds. " The games can be very sexist, for example. Ask your children what would happen in real life if people did the things they do on screen. Ask about other options you could try in real life that do n't work on the computer because of the limitations of the games. " Is there a bright side to all this @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ games increase hand-eye coordination, and this skill improves the longer children play. Computer games also build children 's comfort with technology -- which is essential for our kids ' generation. And according to Karen Johnston, mother of three diehard players, video games can be conducive to socializing. " We have three controllers, so the boys often play together, and if their friends come over, they bring another controller so everyone can play. Having the games is part of the social thing -- they all want it, desire it and if they do n't have the games their friends have, they feel left out. " Kids often spend time on the phone discussing strategies or " cheats, " as well as other aspects of the game. Finally, it 's worth investigating the more wholesome end of the spectrum. Try steering your child toward the sports games that simulate football, snowboarding or hockey, or titles such as SimCity or Tetris, which involve more strategy and less violence. Or you can do @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a vacation, Garrett insisted that his favourite games go along as well. Fourcaudot simply said that was n't possible, and Garrett " threw a tantrum. " But it did n't last long. " He came back downstairs and said he guessed he could get along without them for a week and apologized for getting upset, " Fourcaudot says. His mom knew that was a good sign, an acknowledgement that, yes, you can have fun without a joystick in your hand. Resources Afraid of the Bath Penelope Leach 's Your Baby &; Child from Birth to Age Five( Knopf, revised 1997) includes sections on fears at various ages. <p> 
