2027441 Celebrated composer and teacher Olivier Messiaen died in his sleep after surgery at a Paris hospital on May 5. He was 83. Messiaen 's lifelong sense of curiosity, his masterful and provocative sense of orchestration and color and his intense religious poetics all profoundly influenced Western music since World War II. Messiaen was born in 1908 in Avignon, France, to a cultured family( his father translated English literature, his mother was the poet Cecile Sauvage). He played the piano and composed from his earliest years, and entered the Paris Conservatory at age 11, where he later took first prize in organ, improvisation and composition. In 1930 he became organist at the Trinity Church in Paris, a position he held, except for a wartime interruption, until 1972. In the later 1930s he taught at the pre-university level. A Roman Catholic and a mystic, from the beginning of his compositional career in the late 1920s Messiaen intended his music to express his religious feelings. During the 1930s he discovered and developed the principal rhythmic, harmonic and coloristic features that @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ character. His early " Theme and Variations "( 1931) for violin and piano, although tonal and quite impressionistic, already anticipates aspects of his later music : harmonic " added notes, " Messiaen 's peculiar modal flavoring, the prominent tritone, cluster-like colors, quick changing chords and registral extremes, prolonged repetition, a ceaseless pounding accompaniment and a rapturous climax. Singly or together these elements occur in all of Messiaen 's religious works during the 1930s and ' ' 40s, including his many orchestral and organ compositions, chiefly Apparition de L eglise eternelle( 1932), L'ascension( 1933, 34), La nativite ' du Seigneur( 1935) and Les corps glorieux( 1939). While serving as a French army hospital attendant in 1940, Messiaen was taken prisoner by the Nazis. He was imprisoned until 1942 in Stalag VIII, Gorlitz, Silesia. During his internment he wrote Quartet for the End of Time( 1941) for the four instruments available in the camp : clarinet, violin, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ noted work. Reports suggest that its first performance in front of the camp 's 5,000 or so prisoners, with Messiaen at the piano, was overwhelming. Messiaen himself said that the prisoners were the best audience he ever had. The quartet represents an especially successful amalgam of what would seem to be disparate if not contradictory material and influences. The work is packed with technical ideas that Messaien explains and illustrates in his two-volume treatise The Technique of My Musical Language( 1944), including rhythmic formulas from provinces of India modified and embellished according to imposed " rules, " as well as symmetrical scales that he calls " modes of limited transposition. " In addition to these technical ideas, however, the quartet was written " in homage to the Angel of the Apocalypse, who raises his hand toward the heavens saying : " There will be no more Time. " The score is accompanied with elaborate program notes explaining, from movement to movement, its deeply religious message. As if that were n't enough, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of his lifelong interests. For Messiaen, birds were " God 's little messengers, " and their songs occupy a prominent place in much of his music. He transcribed and quoted in his works bird songs of over 250 species. The first movement of the quartet " Liturgy of Crystal " illustrates something of Messiaen 's compositional style. The piano sounds a repeating series of chords and a repeating rhythmic series. Because the two series are of unequal number they grow out of phase, and one does not hear a single repeated pattern, although the material always sounds " similar. " The rhythmic series derives from " Hindu " rhythmic formulas and the chords from one of Messiaen 's specially devised scales -- or " modes. " The cello 's repeating rhythmic formula and " melody " are similarly derived. Together the piano and cello represent a natural " scene. " The clarinet, using its own scalar " mode, " represents a blackbird, or a nightingale, and the violin various birds in the scene @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Between three and four in the morning the birds awaken ; a blackbird or a nightingale improvises in a cloud of sonorous dust, with a halo of trills lost high in the trees. Transpose this to a religious plane : you have the harmonious silence of Heaven. " The Quartet ends with an emotionally charged slow duet for violin and piano, written yet in another of Messiaen 's " modes. " Of this movement Messiaen wrote : " It is concerned especially with... Jesus the Man, of the Word made flesh, resurrected to communicate his life to us. it is all Love. Its slow rise to the final phrase is the ascension of Man toward his God, of the son of God toward his Father, of the divine creature toward Paradise. " The quartet demonstrates how Messiaen 's mystical and poetic concerns transcend his technical preoccupations to achieve a unique form of 20th-century religious music. After his repatriation Messiaen taught harmony and analysis at the Paris Conservatory, and in 1943 he also began teaching private composition @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ attracted the likes of pianist Yvonne Loriod( who later a became his wife), as well as the young composers Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz Stockhausen and Iannis Xenakis. Later Messiaen was allowed to teach composition at the conservatory, although he was not appointed professor of composition until 1966. His new ideas on rhythm and harmony seemed to galvanize young composers trying to escape pre-World War II musical styles and ideas. In the 1940s and ' ' 50s his courses and lectures were sought after by young composers, and he was invited to teach, among other places, at Berkshire Music Center in Tanglewood. Messiaen 's music attracted international attention in the late 1940s. During that period the composer 's Turangalila-Symphonie( 1948) was commissioned and was performed several times by prominent orchestras, while his solo and chamber music was being presented regularly by some of the world 's finest musicians and ensembles. The symphony, a highly colorful ten movement, 90-minute work, is considered one of Messiaen 's most popular, and was used as @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ' ' 60s. In 1949 and ' ' 50 Messiaen, along with his younger colleagues and students, explored new notions of serialism in music based on Schanberg 's 12-tone theories, some of which he incorporated into his earlier rhythmic and harmonic ideas. This effort resulted in the influential Quatre e'tudes de rythme( 1949), as well as the Livre d'orgue( 1951) and later Chronochromie( 1960). His continued interest in bird songs inspired a number of works, including Re'veil des oiseaux( 1953), Oiseaux exotiques( 1956) and Caralogue d'oiseaux( 1958). The last work is a mammoth collection of piano solos that presents the songs of at least 70 different birds, along with musical portrayals of their natural habitat. Messiaen continued to express his religious concerns throughout his career. Significant religious works written after the Quartet for the End of Time include Visions de l'amen( 1943), Trois petites liturgies de la Pre'sence Divine( 1944), Vingt regards sur l ' enfant Jesus( 1944 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @) and Et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum( 1964). In addition to his many commissions Messiaen received numerous official honors and tokens of recognition from the French government, as well as various musical foundations and organizations, and, most uniquely, the municipal council of Parowan, Utah, which resolved in 1978 to name a local mountain Mt. Messiaen. The composer had written his Des Canyons aux Etoiles( " From the Canyons to the Stars ") in 1974 in Parowan. Messiaen 's stature continued to rise in his later years, and his only opera, St. Francois d'Assise, was hailed at its premier in 1983. His final large work Eclairs sur l'AuDela( " Reflections on the Hereafter ") was finished in 1991, and is scheduled to receive its first performance in November by the New York Philharmonic. The author chairs the department of musicianship studies and composition at the School of Music at DePaul University in Chicago. His music can be heard on Finnadar records. <p> 
