2033441 Capping the long list of reasons is better health // It 's hip to be vegetarian today-and we do n't mean hip as in hippie. Sure, some of us might have love beads still hanging in the closet, but for the estimated 5 million Americans who have chosen a meat-free diet, reasons for going veg are as varied as our favorite ' ' 60s rock stars. Some of us want to live longer, healthier lives or do our part to reduce pollution. Others of us have made the switch to preserve the earth 's natural resources or because we 've always loved animals and are ethically opposed to eating them. Thanks to an abundance of scientific research that demonstrates the health and environmental benefits of a plant-based diet, even the federal government is recommending that Americans consume the majority of their calories from grain products, vegetables and fruits. Why go veg? Here are six great reasons. Get healthy The No. 1 reason most of us switch to a plant-based diet is because we 're concerned about our health, says the Baltimore-based Vegetarian Resource Group. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of all diseases-including one-third of all cancers- are related to diet. A vegetarian diet reduces the risk for several chronic degenerative diseases, such as obesity, coronary artery disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and certain types of cancer-including colon, breast, prostate, stomach, lung and esophageal cancer. The China-Cornell-Oxford Project, a study of the diet and health of 6,500 people from 65 countries, found in the 1980s that rural Chinese people who consumed the least amount of fat and animal products had the lowest risks of cancer, heart attack and other chronic degenerative diseases, compared to those who consumed more animal products. As for cardiovascular disease -- the leading cause of death in the United States-not only is mortality lower in vegetarians than in nonvegetarians, but vegetarian diets have also been successful in arresting and reversing coronary artery disease, says Joel Fuhrman, MD, spokesper- son for Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine and author of Eat to Live : The Revolutionary Plan for Fast and Sustained Weight Loss. Feel younger, live longer @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a vegetarian diet, you can add about 13 healthy years to your life, " says Michael F. Roizen, MD, dean of the School of Medicine, SUNY Upstate, Syracuse, New York, and author of The Real Age Diet. " People who consume saturated, four-legged fat have a shorter life span and more disability at the end of their lives. Animal products clog your arteries, zap your energy and slow down your immune system. Meat-eaters also experience accelerated cognitive and sexual dysfunction at a younger age. " In a 1976-1988 study of 34,000 Seventh-Day Adventists, researchers at Loma Linda University in California found that vegetarians live about seven years longer than meat-eaters, and vegans-people who consume no animal products -- live about eight years longer. Lose weight Meat consumption is linked to obesity. According to the National Center for Health Statistics and the American Society for Clinical Nutrition, 61 percent of adults and 20 percent of U.S. children are overweight. Photograph Beverly Cappel, DVM, always knew she wanted to be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ collected sick or injured animals, " says Cappel, who runs a holistic veterinary care center in Chestnut Ridge, New York. " Our basement was filled with boxes and cages and crates of hurt birds, squirrels, chipmunks, cats and dogs. " Cappel became a vegetarian in 1969, during her pre-veterinary training. " I 've always loved animals, and I 've always been a pacifist, so it makes perfect sense that I would be a vegetarian. " she says. " I have to say, though, that while I became a vegetarian solely for ethical reasons, I would now have to include the health benefits as well. " Photograph // A study from 1986-1992 by Dean Ornish, MD, a Vegetarian Times board member, found that overweight people who followed a low-fat, vegetarian diet lost an average of 24 pounds in the first year and had kept off that weight five years later. Overweight people who adapted a low-fat, vegetarian diet lost weight without counting calories, measuring portions or @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ sense that you 'll lose weight if you follow a low-fat, plant-based diet since you 're eating less fat, no cholesterol and higher fiber, " says Fuhrman. Eliminating dairy from your diet is the first step to losing weight. " Resolve digestive difficulties A number of people who become vegetarians eschew all milk and dairy products because they cause digestive complaints. According to the American Gastroenterological Association, close to 50 million Americans are lactose-intolerant or have trouble digesting the sugar, or lactose, found in milk and dairy products. As a result, they may experience abdominal bloating, flatulence, nausea or diarrhea after consuming milk or dairy products. " Many people are also sensitive to milk protein, " says John McDougall, MD, author of The McDougall Program for Women, which advocates a low-fat, vegetarian diet for optimum wellness. " Your immune system recognizes cow protein as foreign and makes antibodies against it. Unfortunately, these same antibodies attack our own tissues and cause problems like severe arthritis and even Type-I diabetes @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of their concern for animals. Eight billion animals are slaughtered for human consumption each year. And, unlike farms of yesteryear where animals roamed freely, today most animals are " factory farmed " crammed into cages where they can barely move and fed a diet tainted with pesticides. " If you believe that animals are sentient beings, how can you simply disregard their needs and comfort? " asks Polly Walker, MD, MPH, associate director for programs at Johns Hopkins University 's Center for a Livable Future. Reduce pollution Some people become vegetarian ofter realizing the devastation the meat industry is having on the environment. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, chemical and animal waste runoff from factory farms is responsible for more than 173,000 miles of polluted rivers and streams. " By concentrating thousands of animals into a small area, industrial animal production creates threats to both the environment and human health, " says Walker. " Factory farms have the potential to wreak havoc on the environment, as was experienced in North @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, environmental concerns, ethics-whatever your motivation for choosing vegetarianism, you 're in good company. Even though your love beads probably wo n't come back into style, good health will always be in vogue. Author Affiliation by Barbara Tunick Author Affiliation A self-described " animal lover, " Barbara Tunick( " Why Go Veg? " p. 33) still remembers that day in 1983 when she returned from Boston University to find her canary-breeding mother making fried chicken. " I just told her I would n't eat chicken, " Tunick says, " and there was no turning back. " A native of Teaneck, New Jersey, Tunick still lives there with her husband, two dogs and two cats. A columnist for Good Parenting, Tunick seems to know something about being a good daughter too : She continues to live near her mom, whom she has since converted to her healthy, plant-based diet. // <p> 
