2126741 THE COLUMBINE TAPES People seem to be mystified about why the shooting of high school students at Columbine happened SPECIAL REPORT, Dec. 20, but the answer is staring us plainly in the face. Like the parents of gunmen Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who did not notice the early warning signs, society fails to see the path down which it has been heading for some time. Harris and Klebold were themselves victims of a world that left them in a perpetual state of misery. They were desperately searching to find some way not to go out as losers. PAUL FEDERICI St. Catharines, Ont. TIME 's irresponsible cover has given Harris and Klebold the celebrity they wanted. And when an equally irresponsible director like Quentin Tarantino makes the movie, these twisted boys will have achieved the fame for which they killed and ruined so many lives. JUDITH C. BARKLEY San Diego I am the parent of two students at Columbine High. Do you think that looking at Harris and Klebold on the cover of your magazine holding the automatic weapons that killed or physically or mentally @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @? It 's more like pouring salt on the wounds. To release your story just before Christmas -- one that for many parents and siblings will be the most difficult of their lives -- shows a shocking lack of compassion. I do think the story needs to be told, but your timing was callous. The picture -- never. JOANNE ABEL Littleton, Colo. I feel pity for Klebold and Harris. How do we let kids get so lost, feel so alone, that they would do something like this? Their actions were not the fault of their parents or their teachers. These boys were simply victims of the way our society treats teenagers, and they changed from lonely, outcast little boys to violent, homicidal young boys. LANI BROWN Portales,. Your managing editor 's explanation of why TIME chose to do the story was as insightful an analysis of the situation as I 've seen : " This story is not so much about kids seeking glory as it is about grownups not looking and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ confront reality. " There 's no doubt we are all now looking, but as these tragedies continue, it 's obvious that most of us still are n't seeing. ROB DONAHUE Evanston, Ill. With the publicity you have created over the home videotapes that the shooters wanted the world to see, you have passed from reporting the news to participating in the event. Now every potential nutcase will know that if he does something bad enough, TIME is sure to publish his words and the message he wants to send. I fear for the future. LARRY SCHULTZ Bellevue, Wash. You noted that some people would be writing to you saying they had to hide the Columbine issue from their children. But I beg those parents to share the magazine with their children. Your report may be chilling, but it puts a face on the killers, words in their mouths and shows the frightening emotions they felt. An article like this needs to be shown to young adults, since we are the ones @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ your children. This is what is going on in their world. Maybe by showing them the story, you can prompt them to recognize someone they consider a threat. It could save lives. CARISSA FOX, age 16 Philadelphia 
