4134941 Five years ago this week, Anheuser-Busch Cos. agreed to be acquired by Belgian brewer InBev, creating the world 's largest brewer and setting off ripples of worry throughout the region as uncertainty loomed over one of St. Louis ' most revered homegrown businesses. In the years since the $52 billion deal was announced on July 13, 2008, much has changed at A-B 's corporate offices at One Busch Place. The Busch family that ran A-B for more than a century would ultimately exit the company whose beers had become iconic symbols of Americana, marking an end of an era. Now, St. Louis is the North American headquarters for the combined A-B InBev, responsible for U.S. and Canadian operations, and the company 's world headquarters is in Belgium. The change has been jarring. A-B InBev 's local workforce before the merger was about 6,000. A-B declined to release its current local figure, which was trimmed through layoffs and buyouts following the sale, but the brewer has said that it employed 4,000 at the end of 2011 in St. Louis. Also cut loose to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ In 2009, A-B sold Busch Entertainment 's 10 theme parks, including Busch Gardens and Sea World, to private equity firm Blackstone Group. But doomsday scenarios of St. Louis losing its place as the epicenter for the company 's U.S. operations failed to materialize. In 2011, A-B said it planned to invest more than $1 billion in its U.S. facilities from 2011 to 2014, including upgrades to modernize operations at its St. Louis brewery. A-B InBev remains the largest brewer in the country, with its market share accounting for close to half of all U.S. beer sales. Bud Light remains the best selling beer in the country. This year, the brewer marked the 80th anniversary of its iconic association with Clydesdales, and the company says it 's exploring ways to extend the horses ' visibility internationally. One of A-B 's three teams of Clydesdales is based in St. Louis, and its breeding facility is near Boonville, Mo. " There was a tremendous amount of concern that something bad for St. Louis was going to @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the Clydesdales, " said Glenn MacDonald, an economics and strategy professor at Washington University 's Olin Business School. " The fear was that A-B would be downsized to oblivion, and that clearly has n't happened. " MacDonald said some of the changes made after the sale have helped solidify the company 's long-term viability. " It had the trappings of a family company before, and A-B clearly did become a trimmer, more modern company, " he said. " In a way, A-B being less efficient was probably a much bigger risk to St. Louis than InBev. " In January 2010, Luiz Edmond, president of North America for A-B InBev, assumed leadership of the brewery 's U.S. operations in St. Louis upon the departure of president David Peacock, a former head of marketing at A-B who became president after the 2008 sale. In front of more than 100 employees in May at a groundbreaking for a new 300-seat biergarten at the St. Louis brewery, Edmond said the company remains committed to investing @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is just a first step in a three- or four-year project that will bring new news every year and will make this a real attraction, " Edmond said of the new biergarten. Referring to the Budweiser sign that 's been atop the Bevo building since the 1940s, Edmond said : " We hope it 'll be here for another 100 years. " A NEW COMPANY ' After the merger, the combined companies went through an integration period followed by what executives call " optimization. " One of the changes after the merger included adding elements of Six Sigma - a management philosophy that uses data to cut waste and make improvements - throughout A-B, even in human resources. " It 's a new company, " said Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark, a food and beverage industry consulting firm in Buellton, Calif. " The culture 's changed. The philosophy 's changed. The psychology 's changed. It 's a more disciplined company now and more a philosophy of a global company. We 've seen a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the change has n't been one-way. " A lot of people say InBev changed A-B, but A-B also changed InBev, " said Vice President of People Jim Brickey, a 24-year A-B employee who oversees human resources and is a member of the North American Zone 's management committee. Some of A-B 's training programs have been rolled out to employees from around the world, and a long-term incentive program for compensation developed at A-B also has been adopted companywide, he pointed out. The change in ownership also has made A-B less risk-averse, executives say. Faced with competition from craft beer and lower consumer spending during the economic downturn, A-B 's innovation pipeline for new products and packaging has been in overdrive. In 2010, A-B added red, white and blue stars and stripes to Budweiser cans. During the summer months, the packaging has helped spur Budweiser sales, which have been declining each year in the U.S. since the 1980s. The year after the red, white and blue cans debuted marked " Budweiser @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ said Rob McCarthy, vice president of Bud Light brands, who oversaw Budweiser from late 2009 until January. So far this year, its U.S. product launches include Beck 's Sapphire, Budweiser Black Crown, Bud Light Lime Straw-Ber-Rita and Stella Artois Cidre, in addition to the bowtie-shaped Budweiser can. Those new additions followed the launches of Bud Light Platinum and Bud Light Lime Lime-A-Rita last year, which helped A-B InBev 's beer volume in the U.S. grow in 2012 for the first time in four years. " The new company is about taking big bets, " said Pat McGauley, vice president of innovation and new products at Anheuser-Busch. " If we believe we have the proper data, we 're willing to make a bet behind it, and I think that differentiates us from our competitors. " GLOBAL CONNECTIONS Under CEO Carlos Brito, A-B InBev has set out to grow Budweiser and other brands to a broader worldwide audience. Budweiser volume grew 6.4 percent in 2012, boosted by Latin America and Asia, despite @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ that more than half of Budweiser production sold - 51 percent - was outside of the U.S., versus 28 percent in 2009. A-B InBev recently acquired the half of Mexico-based Grupo Modelo it did n't already own, adding Corona to its stable of " global brands " alongside Budweiser, Stella Artois and Beck 's. Victor, N.Y.-based Constellation Brands acquired the Corona license and other Grupo Modelo brands in the U.S. to gain antitrust approval. As A-B InBev grows, ideas generated here in St. Louis are finding their way around the world. Margarita Flores, A-B 's vice president of community affairs, said a 25-year-old partnership between the brewer and the American Red Cross to provide canned drinking water in emergencies is being replicated where the company has operations elsewhere, including Western Europe. The St. Louis brewer also has become a model for other A-B InBev facilities as the parent company seeks to reduce the use of water in plant operations worldwide. In 2007, the last full calendar year before InBev acquired A-B, the St. Louis @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ beer production. The gauge includes every drop of water used - from cleaning beer tanks to water used in brewing beer ; a hectoliter is equal to 26.4 gallons. By comparison, this ratio was 10-to-1 in 1997. Prompted by a corporate push to reduce water and energy use companywide, the St. Louis brewery 's water usage ratio was cut nearly in half to 3.31-to-1 at the end of 2012. The St. Louis brewery was able to achieve the lower level by simple fixes such as turning off a hose immediately after a floor is washed, said Jeff Pitts, general manager of the St. Louis brewery. More complex engineering changes include the deployment of new technology on reclamation systems. " Before, when we were A-B, it was a big deal, but our new company has taken it up a notch, " Pitts said of water and energy reduction goals. " The global initiative is to take all breweries to 3.2 hectoliters, and St. Louis will be expected to be less than 3, " Pitts @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ If we can run it, it 's rolled out at other breweries " worldwide. --- A-B INBEV U.S. SALES The economic recovery and new product launches helped A-B InBev grow its U.S. beer sales last year for the first time since 2008. Its market share has declined, however, as A-B InBev has focused more on growing sales of high-end brands beers than market share gains. SOURCE : Beer Marketers Insights 
