4129941 THE Upper East Side gallery scene is one of the better-kept secrets in the New York art world, but this may be changing. Recently, the area has acquired some of the buzz that adheres to the Lower East Side, thanks to the volatile gods of New York real estate. With rents rising elsewhere, space along 57th Street and on or just off Madison Avenue, from the 60s to the low 80s, is newly attractive. Among the newcomers : On May 1, Blum &amp; Poe, one of Los Angeles 's most prominent galleries, will inaugurate a duplex space at 19 East 66th Street with an exhibition of butterfly paintings by Mark Grotjahn. Unlike Chelsea 's gallery scene, the one uptown is all but invisible from the street, housed mainly in office buildings and discreetly marked brownstones or townhouses. These provide the bonus of architectural diversity, which mirrors the area 's artistic diversity. The exhibitions in this selective sampling range from historical material to emerging artists, with galleries here arranged geographically, north to south. SKARSTEDT GALLERY AND MICHAEL WERNER GALLERY @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ artists. Skarstedt is showing Martin Kippenberger 's 1996 series " The Raft of Medusa, " 50 drawings, lithographs and paintings and an 8-by-15-foot carpet( the raft). They are based on nine photographs( also here) made when Kippenberger( 1953-97) knew he was dying of liver cancer, and in which he assumed the poses of each of the dead, dying or desperate souls aboard the raft in Gricault 's painting of the same title. The group, based on the Gricault work, is extended into a kind of Stations of the Cross, especially in the finely textured drawings, which split the difference between German Expressionism and Neue Sachlichkeit. At Michael Werner, there 's no looking back, only forward motion, in the astounding display of 110 early drawings done by the irreverent shape-shifter Sigmar Polke in the ' 60s and ' 70s. Dispensing with tradition, Polke turned to cartoons, commercial art and doodles for inspiration, laying out ideas fast and furiously. A marvelous prelude to the Museum of @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. GAGOSIAN GALLERY The most interesting exhibition at the Gagosian Gallery 's 980 Madison Avenue headquarters is the ragtag " Portraits of America : Diane Arbus/Cady Noland, " tucked into the ground floor bookstore( which has its own entrance, at 976 Madison). Diane Arbus 's harsh portraits of strange strangers, taken mostly in New York in the 1960s, meet their match in Cady Noland 's more suburban, aluminum-inflected arrangements of empty beer cans, flags, gun holsters, hurricane fencing and handcuffs. Their malaise is made more pointed by enlarged silk-screen images of Lee Harvey Oswald, Patty Hearst and the Manson Family. Varieties of American tragedy are evoked, public and private, known and anonymous. Also at 980 Madison, Venus Over Manhattan 's stunning 50-work survey of Raymond Pettibon 's images of surfers( usually existentially dwarfed by looming waves of blue) is among the better shows of the season. In the lobby, Richard Prince 's deadpan take on Andy Warhol 's emblematic flowers has a succinct, laugh-out-loud wall power. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @) the same Warhol motif on a baby carriage. The Gagosian Gallery 's latest uptown expansion, a storefront space on Park Avenue at 75th Street, opens with the exhibition of a gnarly, endearing bronze of the Last Supper by Urs Fischer. TILTON GALLERY Its patch of trompe l'oeil-weave floor must be among the city 's best parquets, but the Tilton Gallery has the added attraction of Brenna Youngblood 's new paintings. They continue the American tragedy theme of the Arbus/Noland show, subtly balancing abstraction and reality. Their slightly careworn yet undeniable beauty, achieved with thin, somewhat dirty areas of paint or plaster, bits of collage, photographs and ghostly silhouettes, is rife with undercurrents of deprivation and social duress. ADAM BAUMGOLD GALLERY On 66th Street, one of the Upper East Side 's better-kept secrets is Adam Baumgold, celebrating 20 years of presenting cartooning as both an art and an influence, with an exhibition titled " 1st 20. " The raucous display of nearly 40 artists includes Jim Nutt, Saul Steinberg, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ painter Alex Katz thrown in for good measure. FRANKLIN PARRASCH Freshly relocated from 57th Street to 53 East 64th, Franklin Parrasch uptown is inaugurating its exquisitely refurbished townhouse space with a lively, six-way conversation about color : visual and physical, flat and sculptural, inherent and applied, geometric and organic. Through Saturday, works by Sarah Braman, Daniel Turner, Marcia Hafif, Bruce Nauman, John McCracken and Ken Price do the talking. Down the block, Moeller Fine Art( 35 East 64th Street) has a rewarding near-retrospective of Lyonel Feininger 's woodcuts, interspersed with his irresistible pencil drawings. MARIANNE BOESKY GALLERY The larger part of " Matthias Bitzer : Saturnine Swing, " the New York solo debut of a talented German artist-poet, can be seen at the Boesky Gallery in Chelsea, but a beguiling selection of work is also arrayed throughout the gallery 's townhouse on East 64th Street. With a beautiful wall drawing, compressed( and cantilevered) displays of numerous framed works on paper, wire sculptures and hybrid @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Mr. Bitzer mines Modernism for new ideas and pays homage to admired figures like T. S. Eliot. His precision and references to crafts evoke the Renaissance and its optimism. ALEXANDRE GALLERY This East 57th Street gallery examines Loren MacIver 's inimitable exploration of light -- candle, sun, moon, abstract, none of the above -- in works dating from the late 1930s to the early 1980s. MacIver( 1909-98) can be uneven, but her best paintings emit a finely calibrated glow. Lavender hazes of snowflakes, sidewalk drawings at night, the Acropolis in white Greek light -- her reverent naturalism borders on abstraction. A museum reappraisal is due. TIBOR DE NAGY In this excellent show through Saturday, Kathy Butterly 's lavishly colored little ceramic sculptures continue their unabashed mixing of signals. They masquerade as elaborately decorated but damaged vessels beset by collapsed walls, blurred glazes and crusty eruptions of burnt color while evoking the human body, face or personality. They are intensely wrought and fraught, and their full brunt can be grasped @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ inside. The small, quiet trompe l'oeil paintings of Jen Mazza borrow from Modern art and its ephemera in a sympathetic companion show. D. WIGMORE FINE ART It is always interesting and humbling to visit D. Wigmore, which is dedicated to 20th-century American artists, social realism to abstraction, who have mostly either dropped from sight or never achieved visibility in the first place. " Our Postwar Focus : 1960s-1970s, " the current exhibition, is a bright panoply of Op Art, shaped paintings and stained canvases. Some are the efforts of more familiar names, like Richard Anuszkiewicz, Gene Davis, Al Loving and Paul Jenkins. Less familiar is Bill Komodore, represented by " Making Out, " a wonderfully unfussy 1964 Op painting. Another standout is Julian Stanczak 's small " Untitled No. 7, " a fussier example so subtle that you can imagine Loren MacIver liking it. This show is full of gems from a time when formalism was not such a dirty word. DO N'T MISS Other shows to see along @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Gallery( 1045 Madison Avenue, near 79th Street), where " Ain'tings, " a group show selected by the artist Ryan Steadman, features 15 young colleagues making paintings without benefit of paint and with varying degrees of conviction, and at the Half Gallery( 43 East 78th Street), a transplant from the Lower East Side ensconced in a house with its own tiny mews. There the polymorphous Peter Coffin is showing photographs from the early oughties that juxtapose nature and culture. In " Thick Paint, " at Luxembourg &amp; Dayan( 64 East 77th Street), the works of Jean Fautrier( 1898-1962) and Franz West( 1947-2012) frame the ponderous if puppyish troweled-paint canvases of Zhu Jinshi( born 1954), whose efforts are fairly new to New York without being new enough. The surprise is Fautrier 's strange 1927 " Mort du Sanglier "( " Death of the Wild Boar "), an abstract painting whose gravy browns and furry brushwork seem hopelessly infatuated with the hunting still life la Chardin @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 57th Street), " Modern Furies : The Lessons and Legacy of World War I " is notable for a handful of unfamiliar drawings by Otto Dix. In them he recorded firsthand the war 's chaos while also trying to make his peace with Cubism. -- Simple Pleasures No one likes to look at art on an empty stomach. Sometimes the gnawing is quieted by a mobile snack( in my case, a Kind bar, preferably sea salt, dark chocolate and nuts). In dire cases, I repair to the salad bar at Mangia at 50 West 57th Street or, farther uptown, to Three Guys Restaurant( n coffee shop) at 960 Madison Avenue, near 76th Street. My preferred pick-me-up is peanut butter and jelly on whole-wheat toast for a hefty $8, which may not be a typical request : The second time I ordered it, the jelly arrived on the side. I hear the tradition is more entrenched at E.A.T., on Madison Avenue near 80th Street, which has peanut butter and @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Where They Are Most galleries are open Tuesday through Saturday. ADAM BAUMGOLD 60 East 66th Street ; adambaumgoldgallery.com. ALEXANDRE GALLERY 41 East 57th Street ; alexandregallery.com. D. WIGMORE FINE ART 730 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street ; dwigmore.com. FRANKLIN PARRASCH GALLERY 53 East 64th Street ; franklinparrasch.com. GAGOSIAN 980 and 976 Madison Avenue, near 76th Street ; gagosian.com. MARIANNE BOESKY 118 East 64th Street ; **25;2412;TOOLONG. MICHAEL WERNER GALLERY 4 East 77th Street ; michaelwerner.com. SKARSTEDT 20 East 79th Street ; skarstedt.com. TIBOR DE NAGY 724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street ; tibordenagy.com. TILTON GALLERY 8 East 76 Street ; jacktiltongallery.com. 
