4131041 Visiting the set of " Mad Men " at Los Angeles Center Studios early in the show 's run, when critics were given a tour of what was then the Sterling Cooper ad agency and the Draper home, the overwhelming response for me was one of nostalgic recognition : We had that ashtray! I know that linoleum! Those drinking glasses! My mother 's purse! Even if you did n't grow up in a Kennedy era household, the period faithfully depicted in AMC 's hit series resonates in 2014. Even if you do n't recognize the kitchen appliances, you recognize the midcentury ethos. Beyond the careful attention to design and dxE9cor, the show holds a mirror to the formative values that shaped generations of Americans and still echo today. It 's all about secrets and lies : the con that advertising, politics and too many families are built on. Forward looking America, the freedom loving superpower so sure of its exceptionalism, is haunted by its past. The white boys club the Founding Fathers envisioned is still in evidence. " Mad Men " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ season April 13, locally at 8 p.m. on AMC. Seven episodes will air this spring, the final seven next year. Matt Weiner 's dark, adult, Emmy winning drama continues to remind us, as a nation, how we got here. The key playersHow we got here, in terms of the show( spoilers for the first six seasons only) : A clever adman, Don Draper( Jon Hamm) drinks all day on Madison Avenue, spins romantic tales about products for clients, has multiple affairs and, at night, returns to his wife and family in Connecticut. Among his secrets is the fact that he is living under a stolen identity. He is actually Dick Whitman, raised in poverty, in a brothel. By the end of season six, he had come clean to his kids. At the same time, a smart young woman, Peggy Olson( Elisabeth Moss) has risen from serving as Don 's secretary to copywriter at the ad agency, but is continually @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ has had to give up a child, the result of an affair with colleague Pete Campbell( Vincent Kartheiser). For viewers, the pre feminist attitudes sting ; they also register in the present. Equal pay for equal work was n't even a dream then ; it 's a hot topic now. Disrespect of minorities was taken for granted then ; we 're still rooting out prejudices today. Imperfect marriages, derelict parents, unhealthy menus and habits all still with us, but dissected openly now. Our recognition extends beyond the glassware. Why it registersTo Weiner 's credit, great historic moments are allowed to pass quietly, as in life, while the small tics are framed to illustrate the times. The Kennedy assassination is n't a screaming headline, it plays out on a TV in the background of a conversation. The shaking out of picnic refuse on a hillside( no awareness of the environment), the misplaced worry over children wrinkling the dry cleaning( rather than the possibility of asphyxiating themselves with the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a highball to dad after work he captures our mindlessness. The casual sexism, racism, homophobia and anti Semitism that were as thick as the cigarette smoke is a jolt with continuing reverberations. " Mad Men " registers because it underscores how far we 've come, at the same time observing how much things remain the same, how inescapable the past is. This push pull between vintage and contemporary, archaic and modern sensibilities, gives the series its emotional power. Plus xE7a change... That is, the post Eisenhower era is remembered as a time of strict social constructs, prejudices and limitations that we now abhor. But the struggle has only shifted. Micro bigotry and dog whistling are the new normal, expressions of enduring racism. It was also a supposedly sheltered and puritanical era, which of course was n't so pure or sheltered after all. Only repressed on the surface, it was a time of adultery, drug and alcohol abuse, sexual experimentation and endless secrets secrets that continue to define our @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ our gossip magazines. A place in the pantheon As hyper vigilant fans pounce on any anachronism( a reference to Le Cirque before it existed, Betty Draper mentioning her sorority at Bryn Mawr, which did n't have sororities, and various idiomatic phrases before their time), and critics ponder geographic choices( how do the L.A./N.Y. settings affect the storytelling?), the series remains on track to deliver a powerful portrait of a changing culture. " Mad Men " stands tall among the best works of television 's current golden era, or more appropriately the auteur age, a time when the medium embraced the vision of a single creator producer, along with modern technical capabilities, to deliver fully literate series. Weiner and " Mad Men " rank with David Chase and " The Sopranos "( for which Weiner previously wrote), David Simon and " The Wire, " and Vince Gilligan and " Breaking Bad " in this pantheon of great serious dramas that could only have been created for and nurtured by the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of 14 more hours with the intriguingly deceitful, pathetic, conflicted and aspiring characters. Looming questions include the extent of Don 's reformation and the possible integration of his identities, what route Peggy may seize for her future and how stymied she may become, how Joan Holloway( Christina Hendricks) and Roger Sterling( John Slattery) maintain their friendship/flirtation, and how damaged the next generation may be( Don 's daughter Sally has already walked in on her father in flagrante with a woman neither her mother nor his current wife). The politics of the ad agency, along with those of the country, presumably will unfold through the prism of these characters. Only the passage of time and a certain amount of tragedy are guaranteed. As we 've learned from the best of modern TV dramas, if not from life : Some resolution is assured happily ever after is n't. And do n't expect all loose ends to be neatly tied. Joanne Ostrow : 303 954 1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp 
