4138241 It 's Friday the 13th - one of the unluckiest days of the year, if one is prone to superstition. But for some vehicles, a lack of luck is hardly limited to just one day annually. In October, the national Highway Loss Data Institute released its list of best and worst vehicles for insurance losses. The HLDI analyzed 2012 to 2014 model year vehicles according to how often personal injury protection insurance claims were filed. Such claims insure against expenses for injuries in crashes with insured drivers and their passengers, regardless of who was at fault. The results are generally good predictors for more recent versions of the same vehicles, the institute says, unless the model went through a significant redesign. Cars with higher than average personal injury protection claims tend to have lower horsepower and are " overwhelmingly smaller cars, " said Matt Moore, vice president of the HLDI, the nonprofit sister organization of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, based in Arlington, Va. " It 's simply representative of the fact that when cars crash, they typically crash @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ you 're smaller than average, the laws of physics take effect and the vehicle is more likely to sustain more damage and therefore the occupants would be subject to higher injury risk. " Vehicles that score well for personal injury protection insurance losses are, counterintuitively, high-performance vehicles that are n't typically driven daily, Moore added. The Porsche 911 Carrera, for instance, had the lowest claim rate for personal injury protection insurance - 75 percent less than average. Claim rates are relative to the number of insured vehicles of the particular model, to avoid weighting claims based on vehicle popularity. Here are the unluckiest 10. Micro four-door car 113 percent higher than average Introduced to the U.S. market for the 2014 model year, at the bargain basement price of $12,995, the Mirage minicar is powered with a 1.2-liter, three-cylinder gas engine that yields an impressive 44 mpg highway and less stellar 74 horsepower. While it scored " good " in most crash-test categories conducted by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, it ranked " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ simulates an off-center impact. Midsize four-door car 84 percent higher than average Produced for the 2008 to 2014 model years, the Avenger sport sedan reached its sales peak in 2012, with 96,890 vehicles sold in the U.S. alone. Despite earning an IIHS Top Safety Pick in 2012 and 2014 and an even better Top Safety Pick+ award in 2013, the Avenger still landed in a fair number of crashes resulting in personal injury. It has since been replaced with the Chrysler 200. Small four-door car 78 percent higher than average The least expensive entry car in the U.S. market, with a starting price of $11,990, the Nissan Versa is not surprisingly the Japanese automaker 's best seller. Powered with a 1.6-liter, 4-cylinder gas engine that makes 109 horsepower and yields up to 40 mpg highway, the Versa may be more likely to get into a crash, according to HLDI, but it 's also well equipped to protect occupants. It scored " good " in four IIHS crash tests, though " poor " in the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ higher than average A hatchback version of Nissan 's bestselling Versa that was introduced for the 2014 model year, the Note adds style and technology upgrades to the Versa without significantly increasing its cost. Still, what makes it fuel efficient( a small body style and 1.6-liter engine to match), also makes it vulnerable. Small four-door car 76 percent higher than average Kia 's bestselling compact car offers a lot of bang for the 15,900 bucks it costs to buy in. Overhauled for the 2013 model year with Bluetooth, steering wheel controls and a backup camera as standard equipment, it also scored a Top Safety Pick from IIHS for both the 2012 and 2013 model years before falling victim to the same " poor " rating as many other small cars in the small overlap frontal test in 2014. The 2015 model has since improved its small overlap frontal score to " marginal, " with ratings for all other categories scored as " good. " Small four-door car 76 percent higher than average A compact sedan that fails @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ front-wheel-drive version of the Lancer is powered with a 148-horsepower inline-4 cylinder gas engine paired with a continuously variable transmission. While the Lancer is more likely than many other vehicles to get into a crash, according to HLDI, it has nevertheless scored a Top Safety Pick from the IIHS for every model year from 2009 to the present. Small SUV 71 percent higher than average A limited edition of Nissan 's entry-level SUV that went on sale alongside the updated 2014 Rogue, the Select was essentially a 2013 model with lower fuel economy, fewer safety features and a less dramatic style than the updated Rogue that replaced it. Larger than most vehicles on the HLDI list for personal injury protection claims, the IIHS gave the 2014 Select generally " good " ratings, with an " acceptable " for roof strength and " marginal " for small overlap frontal test. Midsize four-door car 68 percent higher than average Prior to its 2015 model year overhaul, the Chrysler 200 was a re-engineered version of the Chrysler Sebring that was likewise a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ 65 percent higher than average Nissan 's unusually boxlike and modern-looking hatchback with the asymmetrical wraparound rear window was only briefly available in the U.S. - from 2009 until last year, when it was pulled from the market due to poor sales. Mini four-door car 65 percent higher than average Even smaller than the Forte, Kia 's subcompact Rio was revamped for the 2012 model year based on its sister company, Hyundai 's, Accent - and updated again for 2015. Prized for its low starting price( now $14,990) and fit and finish for the money, the Rio is less likely than the Forte to get into a crash, but it also scores lower on the IIHS safety tests. It has never achieved an IIHS Top Safety Pick, though its IIHS safety scores have dramatically improved since 2011. **25;5474;TOOLONG 
