4090541 Exclusively in your print edition Behind the brick-red cantina on industrial Clinton Drive, in the shadow of the Port of Houston, sex traffickers for more than a decade have sold women and girls for sex, some as young as 14, imprisoned by intimidation and fear. So notorious is the bar that undercover Texas alcohol investigators long ago documented its seedy intricacies : an escape hatch, a hidden passageway leading to decrepit and gated houses of prostitution described as " horse stalls. " Federal, state and local agents learned by name and face many key characters who operated La Costeita and made repeated - but only partially successful efforts - to stop them. An unexpected break came last year when a trafficking victim dared beg for rescue during an unannounced state inspection of the bar. Last week, federal agents secured the indictment of alleged cantina owner and operator Maria " Nancy " Rojas and nine others, arresting them in a late-night raid on the club and compound and rescuing at least nine women and girls. # It is the third time since 2005 that federal prosecutors have @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ rogue Clinton Drive cantinas. But in the past, the alleged ring members demonstrated an uncanny ability to regenerate their operation and continue trafficking and selling sex in the same locations, records show. Various members of the ring, identified in the new indictments, have for a dozen years repeatedly used the Clinton Drive cantinas, including the Maria Bonita and La Costeita, to harbor women and girls illegally brought to the United States and sell them - along with paper towels and condoms - to clients in a lucrative cash business, documents allege. A paper game To avoid seizures and shutdowns, ring members repeatedly transferred business ownerships or property after past crackdowns, deftly playing a paper game that left some city and state officials frustrated and clamoring for stronger laws targeting people who profit from selling women, men and minors as virtual slaves, according to documents and interviews. This time around, state, local and federal officers acting together as the Houston Trafficking Rescue Alliance hope the operation is shut down for good. Along with @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to seize nine properties, including the Costeita Bar, houses and other proceeds earned by the sex-trafficking ring. " There 's a lot of money to be made, " said Assistant United States Attorney Ruben Perez. " That 's why they keep rearing their ugly heads. It 's very lucrative. " Deep roots in Houston Victims of human trafficking, often psychologically and physically damaged, typically receive shelter and short-term government assistance after rescues as criminal cases continue. However, some rescued in previous operations drifted away or fled before completing the long, difficult process needed to obtain T-visas reserved for trafficking victims. Some of the players named in the latest indictments have 20-year roots in Houston. Rojas, 46, a cantina owner identified in last week 's indictments of the Clinton Drive trafficking ring, started out as a prostitute in Houston in 1990, Harris County court records show. That year, Rojas was arrested for prostitution together with Gregoria " Blanca " Salgado Vazquez, now 60, and another illegal immigrant leader in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ but illegally returned, bought property and are alleged to be co-conspirators. For years, Rojas oversaw operations at La Costeita while Vazquez ran other bars and actively imported girls from Mexico to sell as prostitutes, the indictment and other records allege. Later, the ring turned to another ruthless supplier - Gerardo Salazar Tecuapacho from the Mexican state of Tlaxcala who earned the nickname " El Gallo " by tattooing his girlfriends and victims with his trademark rooster. Salazar, now in his mid 40s, long led a band of traffickers who specialized in conning unsuspecting young women into accompanying them to Houston where despite promises of love, marriage or legitimate jobs, a life of cantina slavery awaited, records allege. In 2005, one of Salazar 's teenage victims called a domestic violence hot line and told rescuers she 'd been brutally beaten and sold in Clinton Drive clubs. Agents successfully made cases against five ring members. But neither Rojas or Vazquez, the two women operators, was indicted. Salazar evaded arrest and fled to Mexico @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, an anonymous tip led to his arrest last year in Mexico. He was taken to a state prison though he offered his red Pontiac Trans Am and a house in exchange for his freedom, Mexican documents say. Salazar remains in Mexico as the U.S. seeks his extradition. Mother, son arrested But the Clinton Drive cantinas continued, business as usual. Vazquez and her U.S.-born son, David Salazar, were arrested in 2008 by the Jacinto City police department after another teenage trafficking victim called 911, claiming to be held captive in their house. Her calls, on a borrowed cell phone, prompted manhunts. Once found, the girl told a Jacinto City detective she also had been forced to prostitute herself in cantinas. Vazquez and David Salazar were prosecuted for harboring an illegal immigrant ; their house was seized. But their Clinton Drive cantina, the Maria Bonita, remained open for another year or more. Bar owners who operate businesses as fronts for organized crime can be shut down, or even lose their @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the process can be complex. But lawless bar operators employ lookouts and bouncers to thwart agents and use legal tricks to keep operating by changing ownership on deed records or renewing liquor licenses under names borrowed from family or friends. " It 's been hard to stop them, " said Mandi Sheridan Kimball, director of public policy and government affairs for the advocacy organization Children at Risk. " People are kind of at a loss for how to prevent it. " 65 businesses targeted The city of Houston in 2009 tried to target the Maria Bonita by using the state 's nuisance law, which prohibits a range of crimes including prostitution. Two months later, the city was notified that the bar had changed hands, said Nirja Aiyer, a senior assistant city attorney. " We all know they 're just doing it on paper, but the problem the city has is that you ca n't go after the new owner and say, ' You 're responsible for all the crime at this property, when they were @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ were committed, " she said. In the past three years, the city has targeted 65 businesses, including cantinas, with a " high likelihood " of being havens for trafficking. So far, 40 have been evicted, closed down voluntarily or sued by the city. City officials shut down at least four sites involved in sex trafficking. In the months before the latest indictments, new witnesses came forward with horrifying stories of abuse : One told of being repeatedly struck and having a gun placed to her abdomen while pregnant ; her life and the lives of family were threatened if she refused to engage in prostitution. Other girls, including minors supplied with fake IDs, got slapped, hit and kicked often as owner Rojas watched, federal court records say. None of the victims rescued so far from the Clinton Drive cantinas has received any restitution from arrests or seizures, something activists say they should receive. " Why ca n't the victims own the buildings? " asks Dottie Laster, who helped rescue @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ there. " lise.olsen@chron.com susan.carroll@chron.com... A DOZEN YEARS OF CANTINA TRAFFICKING 1999 : Human traffickers begin using Clinton Drive cantinas, including La Costeita and the Maria Bonita. 2005 : Unidentified minor girl with rooster tattoo escapes and claims being beaten and prostituted at both bars. November 2005 : Clinton cantinas raided ; five ring members arrested. Trafficker Gerardo " El Gallo " Salazar flees. Bars remain open. 2006 : Maria " Nancy " Rojas, deported after prostitution arrest, later illegally returns to operate La Costeita. March 2008 : Teenage girl in Jacinto City calls 911, claiming to have been held as sex slave by Maria Bonita owners. 2008-2009 : Reports of prostitution and illegal activity continue at La Costeita. June 2009 : Maria Bonita 's liquor license canceled by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. July 2009 : Maria Bonita owners Gregoria Vazquez and son David Salazar convicted of harboring an illegal immigrant ; Jacinto City home seized. July-September 2009 : The city of Houston attempts to seize Maria Bonita but property changes ownership. February 2010 : @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ $9,000 fine issued for various violations. Feb. 26, 2010 : Texas attorney general reports evidence of trafficking and assaults at La Costeita. February 2011 : Ten ring members indicted on human trafficking charges ; federal officials begin efforts to seize homes and other property. Court records allege Rojas as main cantina operator and say Gerardo Salazar and Vazquez supplied girls for ring. Source : Federal and state court records, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission reports and liquor-licensing data, property records. # # 
