3042841 <p> Pope reiterates ancient truths Pope John Paul II has done nothing more than reiterate the centuries-old dogmas of the Roman Catholic Church, guiding his flock into the next century with ancient truths. That 's the belief of most people responding to last week 's ethics column that questioned whether the pope had gone too far with recent pronouncements. Here 's a sampling of responses : As the 263rd direct successor to St. Peter, the pope 's job is n't to please liberal theologians and " cafeteria Catholics " who pick and choose doctrines to suit their own desires. His job is to pass on faithfully and without error the same truths received from the Apostles. The church from the earliest days has... condemned abortion, euthanasia and artificial contraception. Bob Walden, Peachtree City As a convert to the Catholic faith and an editor of an international magazine for Catholic women, I was disappointed to see that the Holy Father 's effort to define the deposit of faith left by Christ is so misunderstood. Since the keys were handed to Peter, the popes have lived @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ change, add to, or water down. Public opinion can not alter this deposit, nor can manipulation, force, or sheer human will. That Pope John Paul II reiterates centuries-old dogmas as essential to our defined faith only underscores the presence of the Holy Spirit guiding the flock and encourages the faithful to persevere in their own witness to the truth. Genevieve S. Kineke, Roswell When a person applies for his or her driver 's license, they do n't have a choice of deciding which rules of the road that they are going to obey. All are required to be followed. Society has decided which rules of the road would be for the good of society. If every Tom, Dick and Harry decided to do their own thing -- what they think is best for them( and not the community) -- what a chaotic world we would live in. This can be likened to the rules of the church. Each member can't/should n't decide what they think is best for them individually and the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the church discern what Christ is asking of us. Patricia G. Di Rito, Norcross As a faithful Catholic, I fully support Pope John Paul II 's most recent directives as he is only affirming what the Catholic Church has always taught. I am always baffled at the misconceptions that people have that he is out of touch with the times and should somehow change what the church has taught for 2,000 years. Jim Jatcko, Roswell How can a person remain true to his faith and not abide by the teachings of his or her faith? The Roman Catholic Church was founded by Jesus and Jesus remains the same yesterday, today and tomorrow. Today 's issues are not different from those in the past, they just have different titles. Faith must remain constant and strong, otherwise it will fall just like the house the man built upon the sand. Carolyn W. Attaway, Atlanta I feel that few issues are black or white ; they are mostly shades of gray. Furthermore, we are all influenced @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ pope has made a mistake in taking a stand that allows for no more dialogues on the issues of ordination for women and euthanasia. Clif Trussell, Snellville John Paul II does not believe he is going " too far " and neither do the faithful since the pope is protecting fundamental articles of faith as understood by the Roman Catholic Church and others who subscribe to tenets of Christianity. There can be no debate within the church about certain topics since these are settled. The church has never been about conforming to the world. Edward A. Watkins, Decatur Pope John Paul II took a definite step forward by stamping out debate on certain issues. A few years back, before I became Catholic, I remember thinking that while the world is going crazy -- at least the pope remains consistent. Nearly 2,000 years of church history... should not be allowed to change just because it 's fashionable! Dee Dee Hobrook, Atlanta I think that the pope is completely correct in his pronouncements. Those Catholics that @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ no right to question the pope in these matters. Edward Nelson, Atlanta I am a Roman Catholic. I do not think the pope went too far. That is his job : to take a firm stand, to tell us all what we are supposed to believe and what we are supposed to do. If it alienates... people, then they can leave the church. Helen Young, Atlanta The church does n't change rulings concerning... faith and morals. It 's hard for Americans and Protestants to believe, but Christianity is not like Congress -- that as times change, the laws change. The laws according to the church are not subject to change. Chris Drake, Atlanta There are certain things you can not change because our God is the same yesterday, today and tomorrow. The pope does only what Jesus Christ taught us and that is not to bend to popular opinion. Joan McElroy, Atlanta Vatican Council II was thought by many to be too much, but @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ for sorely needed dialogue, discussions and decisions. The pope has closed that door. Will it require Vatican III to have it reopened? Bob Ruddy, Peachtree City I do not believe the pope went too far. The Holy Father is only emphasizing what has been church doctrine forever. If any Catholics are alienated, they can always leave the church. Barbara Longamore, e-mail As an older cradle Catholic, I see Pope John Paul II as the successor of Peter and God 's representative on earth. I accept the entire Catholic " package " as handed down by the magisterium of the church. There 's an old dictum : Catholicism is a hard religion to live in but an easy one to die in. Since when is the church a democracy? Human intellectual brilliance is no match for light of the Holy Spirit. Theologians who challenge the directives of the Holy Father would seem to be acting from pride and arrogance. Jesus said, " Unless you become like little children.... " @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ done everything it needs to do -- retraction, apologies, firings -- to right the wrong over the network 's " Tailwind " story? BACKGROUND INFORMATION : On June 7, a report on " NewsStand : CNN &; Time " alleged that in 1970, U.S. military forces dropped sarin nerve gas on U.S. defectors and civilians in Laos. Almost immediately, participants and critics charged CNN with journalistic malfeasance. CNN eventually retracted the story and apologized to viewers and military personnel. Several people were fired and Peter Arnett, the on-camera reporter, was reprimanded. But the debacle refuses to die. People both inside CNN and outside think more heads should roll. WHAT DO YOU THINK : Has CNN done enough? Can the network every regain its credibility? Call our ethics hotline at 404-222-1877. Fax us at 404-526-5509 or e-mail us at bparham@ajc.com. Please provide your name and a daytime phone number. Deadline for responses is 5 p.m. Tuesday. 
