4134341 COLUMBIA, MO. - The score does n't matter nearly as much as the moment does. Saturday night at Faurot Field was the night that Missouri football officially became the program of every Tiger lover 's wildest dreams and most agonizing nightmares. By the end of No. 7 Georgia 's 41-20 victory, the modest pocket of scarlet red Bulldogs fans were the loudest voices to be heard in suddenly tame Faurot Field, taking over the far southwestern corner of the end zone with a rather snarky, but perfectly appropriate chant of " old man football " to the absolute delight of all the Dawgs in the house. They had been fairly silent most of the night - quite nervous actually - as the Tigers controlled the game and held the lead deep into the third quarter of their nationally televised, prime-time debut in the mighty Southeastern Conference. All night long, this endless sea of gold-clad Mizzou fans had been making the loudest noises in the sold-out house, chanting and cheering and reveling in the dizzy mood of what was starting to look like a wildly successful SEC coming-out @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, the ambitions are not so wide eyed and lofty as they are in places like Athens, Baton Rouge and Tallahassee. They have always been slightly more modest and a great deal more reasonable. All they ever wanted was a chance. A chance to be taken seriously. A chance to stand on equal ground with college football 's best and brightest. A chance to show the rest of the college football world that they can play big boy football with the best of them. So Saturday night 's game accomplished all of that and so much more. But by the end of the night, it turns out that life on the narrow ledge where highly ranked SEC teams live was not much different for Mizzou than its previous journeys onto a similar narrow shelf with the best and brightest in the Big 12. Just another big tease, another frustrating near miss, another night of too many odd mishaps and maddening failures. It was a three-hour infomercial on how far the Tigers have come in a decade under @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ have to go before they can be considered a legitimate and consistent program to be reckoned with on the national stage. Killer turnovers and odd risk taking turned this from a game that Mizzou controlled( 20-17 with 2:39 left in the third quarter) into a game that completely slipped out of their grasp. A curious fake punt on fourth and 11 on the Mizzou 35 did n't work and it gave Georgia three points. A James Franklin interception in the shadow of the goal line produced another Georgia TD, and a fumble by Franklin again in the goal line shadow produced another Bulldogs TD and just like that, it was an ugly blowout instead of a stunning upset of the seventh-ranked team in the land. " You ca n't make the kind of mistakes we made and survive against a team like that, " said Pinkel. " You just ca n't do that. " We 've seen this one before, probably too many times, actually. But at the end of the night, I was convinced @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ enough to be among the best in the SEC. They are not in over their heads. Their defense is as fast and furious as any SEC defense. Their offense has as many weapons as most of the better schools in the conference. But they ca n't give away games like this, because there are a lot more teams just as good as Georgia and even better. There is heavy lifting to be done every week in this league. But still, when you consider the entire night, the completely wonderful environment, the incredible atmosphere that was building in this football-crazed college town all day long, you have to at least take a moment to acknowledge what was going on here. Win, lose or draw, Mizzou football has turned a corner. " It 's absolutely amazing, " said former MU offensive tackle and current radio commentator Howard Richards. " Look at this scene. Feel all this energy in the stadium. Look at how competitive this football team is playing. " I can @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ just how angry and frustrated he would get with all the fans and reporters who were giving him " atta boys " when the Tigers lost back-to-back close games to Oklahoma and Nebraska in the 2002 season. The square-jawed young coach had arrived from Toledo only a year earlier, and he seethed slowly every time some alum came up to him after the game just to let him know how nice it is that the Tigers could lose to the big boys with dignity instead of getting beaten into submission by 30-point deficits. Every time it happened, you could see him grit his teeth and look at all these people as if they had horns coming out of their noses. He could n't quite understand this happy loser mentality and it pretty much ticked him off. He kept saying it over and over again until somebody, anybody would listen. He did n't come to Mizzou to lose with class. He was n't there to build a program that would be willing to settle for the low ceiling of just being better @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ he came to Missouri to return this program to national prominence, to be good enough to win conference titles, go to bowl games and yes, even compete for national titles. It seemed like crazy talk at the time, particularly considering how bad Mizzou football had been for so long( remember the 14 losing seasons in 16 years before he arrived?). The Tigers have now moved on from the Big 12 to the best college football conference in the land. TV talking heads were actually picking Mizzou to upset Georgia, and this town and this state have been swept up into a rather surprising football-crazed frenzy. This is the epitome of the grand football dream Pinkel had in mind when he came. " I could n't have imagined this was possible 10-12 years ago, " said Richards. " You look at the type of coaches they had hired in the past. None of them could do the job. No matter who they hired, big names, guys who had reputations, and it @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ find a guy who could get us over the hump, " said Richards. " And then they bring in Gary and I was like, ' Who is Gary Pinkel? ' " Now everyone knows who Pinkel is. He 's the man who set the tone, created the dream and convinced administrators, alums and recruits that something impressive could happen here. " He told everyone to imagine what was possible, " said Richards. " I do n't know if everyone believed him then, but they do now. " 
