4136841 Last week 's backlash in Indiana and Arkansas over legislation that some said would sanction anti-gay discrimination may have ripples in Missouri. Critics of a Missouri bill set for a hearing this week say it 's a college-campus version of what the other two states were trying to do, before their conservative governors retreated in the face of push-back from gay activists and business interests. " We 're hoping that provides an additional platform for us to fight this, " said Kyle Piccola, lobbyist for the Missouri gay rights group PROMO. A second Missouri bill - to extend to gay Missourians the same anti-discrimination protections guaranteed to racial minorities and others - may have a better shot at passage because of those other states ' battles, its sponsor predicted. " I was n't at all hopeful before that my bill would get floor time, " said Missouri state Sen. Joe Keaveny, D-St. Louis. Now, he said, he 's planning to move for a floor debate this week. " I 'm hoping that what happened in Indiana will spur a conversation. " Missouri religious @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Indiana and Arkansas. " It is very frustrating. We are dismayed that any time these discussions come up, political correctness is what carries the day, " said Kerry Messer, president of the Missouri Family Network, a conservative religious-freedom group. " The real debate is, should individuals have a right to live by their own deep-seated convictions when they 're not hurting anybody? " Conservative lawmakers in Indiana and Arkansas in recent weeks approved measures they said were designed to protect religious beliefs. Critics said they were thinly veiled attempts to protect businesses that discriminate against gays and lesbians. Both states ' bills would prohibit any laws that " substantially burden " people or businesses from following their religious beliefs. Neither states ' legislation specifies anything about sexual orientation. The federal government and numerous states, including Missouri and Illinois, have for years had laws on the books to protect religious beliefs from government intrusion. Defenders of the Indiana and Arkansas bills have argued those proposals are n't any different. " It is about religious @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Mike Pence said in a news conference last week. QUICK RETREATS Critics counter that the difference is the context of the times. The 1993 federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act was passed to protect religious practices from secular laws, such as Native American rites that use peyote, a normally illegal hallucinogen. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that federal law was unconstitutional as it applied to the states. In response, Illinois, Missouri and other states passed their own versions. Then-Missouri state Sen. Peter Kinder, now the state 's lieutenant governor, said when he sponsored Missouri 's statute that it was meant to address things like churches that hold candlelight services being accused of fire code violations. The national political context of the Indiana and Arkansas laws is different, opponents say. Those laws arose following passage of same-sex marriage rights in numerous states - and amid predictions that the U.S. Supreme Court might soon rule in favor of those rights. Pence in particular has pushed back against the claim that Indiana 's law is designed to allow anti-gay @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ " smear campaign " by opponents and " mischaracterization " by the media. However, it has n't just been the media and the law 's opponents who have characterized it as anti-gay. That 's also the position of some of the law 's most enthusiastic supporters - including the conservative Indiana lobbying group Advance America, which lobbied for the law and whose director stood next to Pence as he signed it Tuesday. " Churches, Christian businesses and individuals deserve protection from those who support homosexual marriages, " the group wrote on its website after the initial passage of the Indiana law, under the headline, " Victory at the State House! " " Christian bakers, florists and photographers should not be punished for refusing to participate in a homosexual marriage! " But while garnering support from the key Republican constituency of religious conservatives, Pence and Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson quickly found themselves at odds with another key constituency : business. The new law in Indiana sparked a backlash from public relations-minded businesses and entities, including @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ over the law. And the behemoth Wal-Mart, based in Arkansas, publicly called on Hutchinson to veto that state 's measure. Both governors responded by seeking quick fixes to their laws to specify that they ca n't be used to discriminate based on sexual orientation. Both signed the revised measures on Thursday, a lightning-speed turnaround process by political standards. TWO MISSOURI BILLS So how do events in Indiana and Arkansas affect pending bills in Missouri dealing with religious freedom and gay rights? Gay rights advocates say the implications are huge. Religious freedom advocates say they are irrelevant. One of the Missouri bills coming up this week would create the " Student of Association Act, " prohibiting colleges and universities from withholding funds or taking any other action against student religious organizations based on the organization 's " religious requirements or leadership standards. " The bill passed the House March 19 on a 117-38 vote, and is set for a hearing in the Senate Judiciary Committee at noon Tuesday. The sponsor, Rep. Elijah Haahr, R-Springfield, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ bill is n't to sanction discrimination against gays, but to protect organizations that bar any group based on religious beliefs. " All this requires is that Religious groups be able to select their members and their leadership based upon the tenets of their sincerely held beliefs, " Haahr said. " If the Jewish center wants to require its membership to adhere to a kosher lifestyle, the University should not prohibit them from such. " Haahr said the debate over the Indiana and Arkansas laws " deals with a completely different subject. " Piccola, of PROMO, argued that the bill is a clear attempt to sanction discrimination by groups that receive official support from their universities. " Indiana would allow refusal to serve based on religion " under the original bill before it was amended, Piccola said. " This bill brings that same intention onto( Missouri) college campuses. " He said his group will lobby for its defeat. Keaveny 's bill, to make sexual orientation a protected class under Missouri 's nondiscrimination laws, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @, he predicted Friday. Illinois already has such a law on its books. " I do n't know why we would want to discriminate against anybody, " he said. " I hope we can have a robust debate going and do the right thing. " Messer, of the Missouri Family Network, argued that Missourians have already spoken on the issue with their overwhelming passage in 2004 of the state 's constitutional amendment prohibiting gay marriage. " Everybody thought, That 's settled, ' and now all the sudden, religious liberty is under attack, " he said. 
