3000041 <p> Basketball United States Wins Bronze Medal : The United States used another comeback yesterday to take the bronze medal at the world championships in Buenos Aires, beating Puerto Rico by 107-105 in overtime. Kenny Anderson scored 34 points and made two free throws with one second left to send the game into overtime after Puerto Rico led by 8 points with 1 minute 34 seconds to play in the second half. Yugoslavia, which beat the United States in the semifinals, will face the Soviet Union for the gold medal today. This was the fourth straight international tournament in which the United States had failed to win a gold. Any medal for the United States looked out of the question with 1:34 left in regulation when Raymond Gausse 's 3-pointer gave Puerto Rico a 96-88 lead. Then Anderson hit a jumper with 1:21 to play to get the United States within 6, and Puerto Rico opted for possession rather than foul shots four times in the final 1:19. After a backcourt violation, Anderson made two free throws with 51 seconds left. Todd Day scored 14 seconds later @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ another Puerto Rico turnover. Jose Ortiz, who had 25 points and 11 rebounds, tried to inbound the ball, but overthrew Federico Lopez, and the Americans had possession and a chance for their third comeback victory in the tournament. Anderson took the ball, drove into two players and took a jumper. He was fouled and hit two free throws to make the score 96-96. The United States scored the first 4 points of overtime. Edgar Leon scored inside for Puerto Rico with 2:37 left, then Anderson, gave the United States a 5-point cushion with a 3-pointer 27 seconds later.( AP) Diving Titles for Ferguson and Williams : Kent Ferguson regained his 3-meter springboard title and Wendy Williams successfully defended her platform title yesterday at the national outdoor championships in Dallas. Ferguson overtook the leader and defending three-meter champion, Mark Bradshaw, in the fifth round of dives, then led the rest of the way, finishing with 653.70 points. Scott Donie was second with 628.56. Matt Scoggin took third with 620.19 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. She moved into the lead on her next dive and increased the margin to 30 points over Kathy Carboy. Carboy ended with 378.96 points, beating Kelly Jenkins, who had 365.34. The championships end today with the finals in the women 's 3-meter springboard and men 's 10-meter platform.( AP) Boxing Benn Stops Barkley Quickly : Nigel Benn of Britain retained his World Boxing Organization middleweight championship yesterday by stopping Iran Barkley of New York in the first round of their scheduledJU 12-round bout in Las Vegas, Nev. Benn knocked down Barkley three times in the first round, ending the bout under Nevada rules. The end came at 2:57. There was momentary confusion, however, over whether the bout was over. Referee Carlos Padilla had to confer with members of the Nevada State Athletic Commission to determine whether Barkley 's third time on the canvas was a knockdown or just a slip. The commissioners ruled that Benn 's last flurry, two rights to the head and a third right that missed, had produced @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ World Boxing Council middleweight champion, with a 25-7 record and 16 knockouts. Bennhas a 27-1 mark with 25 knockouts.( AP) Golf 2 or 24 Share Lead : There were either 2 or 24 co-leaders yesterday after the third round of the International tournament in Castle Rock, Colo. The scoreboard at the Castle Pines Golf Club showed Eduardo Romero of Argentina and Jose-Maria Olazabal of Spain tied for the top spot with 26 points each. But under the peculiar format for the event they were, in effect, tied with 22 others, some of whom were 10 points behind them. The top 24 point-makers from the first three days ' play advanced to today 's final round, and at that point, all scores reverted to zero, so the 54-hole lead was meaningless. There were no leaders, only survivors. In fact, the third-round co-leaders did n't even win unofficial " day money " that went to the player with the best point total for the third round. That $10,000 prize went to Davis @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in yesterday 's play. Scoring in the event is based on a modified Stableford system, in which points are awarded for the players ' performance on each hole : 5 for eagle, 2 for birdie, 0 for par, -1 for bogey and -3 for double-bogey or higher. It took a score of 16 points or better for three rounds to make it to the final round. Among the casualties were Hale Irwin, Greg Norman and Jack Nicklaus, who designed the course in the eastern foothills of the Rockies.( AP) Bies Hold Seniors Lead : Don Bies shot a 66 yesterday to take a two-stroke lead over Mike Hill and Rives McBee in the Seniors Showdown Classic in Jeremy Ranch, Utah. Bies, of La Quinta, Calif., finished with a 36-hole total of 132, 12 under par, over the hilly Jeremy Ranch Golf Club course. McBee, who led after Friday 's first round with a tournament-record of 64, fired a 70. Hill led briefly after moving to 12 under @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ bogeys on the final two holes to finish with a 68.( AP) Little League Pennsylvania Team Gains : The Shippensburg team from Pennsylvania advanced to the Little League World Series yesterday by defeating Newark American of Delaware, 8-2, in the final of the Eastern regional tournament at Bristol, Conn. Bob Shannon pitched a complete game for Shippensburg, which finished with a 15-0 record in tournament play. Shippensburg will meet the Cottage Hill team from Mobile, Ala., the representative from the Southern region, in a first-round game Wednesday. The World Series, which includes the four regional winners and four international teams, begins Tuesday in Williamsport, Pa. A team from Brooklyn, Mich., representing the Central region, will meet the winner of last night 's Western final between Cypress, Calif., and East Boise, Idaho. 
