4128541 WORDS WITH... MIKE BREY Notre Dame coach Mike Brey talks about the rebounding ability of 6-foot-9, 246-pound senior forward Jack Cooley, who leads the Fighting Irish in scoring( 15.2 points per game) and rebounding( 11.3 per game), and the team 's readiness to begin Big East Conference play today against Seton Hall. Q : What makes Cooley such a good rebounder? A : When I saw him play the day I went to evaluate him at Loyola with Gene Cross, he rebounded out of his area. That was the first thing that caught my eye. They were packed in a zone against him, and he was moving all over the place. He does that. And he just has a great nose for the ball. Loose balls on the floor he gets his hands on, balls off the rim. I think he takes a lot of pride. The other thing, a great offensive rebounder never accepts a block-out. The only time he accepts a block-out is when he 's thoroughly exhausted. He just does n't accept a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ against in our practices because big guys think, " Gosh, that was a pretty good block-out and he spins off it. " And now he takes a lot of pride in the rebounding thing. He knows that 's something he 's really known for, and he 's proud of it. Q : It seems like every ball he gets his hands on, he gets. A : Great hands. He really is an underrated athlete. I know his gait when he runs is unusual, and people think he 's a plodder, but he really is athletic. In addition to great athletic ability, he has great hands. If it 's loose on the floor around him, and there could be three Big East, I-95 guards in there, he has been snatching out of those piles forever. He 's good with the ball. A lot of that is his intelligence. He 's a highly intelligent guy. Q : There have been a lot of Big East games already played. What @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ going to come down to game situations, no question. A lot of it is game situations, how are you defending late game, can you get the ball inbounds against pressure, can you make free throws? Can you execute to get a good look? Q : What have you learned about your team? A : I think we can get better, and I think we have. I think individuals have gotten better.... Just in the starting nucleus we have had individual improvement. I still think we can get more with this group. We 've got a pretty good feel of who we are. I do n't want to let up on improvement, but I think we have a good feel of our identity. ABOUT THE ACC The first weekend of conference games unfolds with perhaps the most intriguing matchup coming Sunday with North Carolina at Virginia. The most interesting team to watch in the preseason was Maryland, which remains unranked in the latest poll despite a 12-1 record. The Terps were @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the bottom of the ACC but have reeled off 12 consecutive victories after a season-opening loss to Kentucky. Maryland opens ACC play at home against Virginia Tech. Don't-miss game : North Carolina( 10-3) at Virginia( 10-3), 8 p.m. Sunday, ESPNU : It 's a tossup whether this game or Maryland at Virginia Tech today is the best matchup, but the star power of North Carolina probably carries the day. The Tar Heels lead the all-time series 127-49, including 44-31 at Virginia. Let the sorting-out process of contender vs. pretender begin. Elsewhere in the league, it 's Wake Forest at Duke, Miami at Georgia Tech, N.C. State at Boston College, and Florida State at Clemson. Notes : North Carolina 's Reggie Bullock leads the ACC in 3-point field-goal percentage at 47.5 percent.... Wake Forest 's Travis McKie leads all active ACC players with a scoring average of 14.5 points per game.... Miami 's Trey McKinney-Jones has made 90.6 percent of his free throws this season, which leads @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ only player in the ACC to lead his team in blocked shots( 24) and steals( 18).... Duke is 12-0 for the 14th time in school history and the ninth under coach Mike Krzyzewski.... N.C. State has shot better than 50 percent from the floor in 11 of its 13 games. GAME OF THE WEEK No. 8 Ohio State( 11-2) at No. 11 Illinois( 13-2), 2:15 p.m. Saturday, Big Ten Network : An early-season matchup between two of the league 's better teams is a good way to get things rolling on the first full weekend of conference games in the Big Ten. Illinois has struggled a bit of late, losing two of its past three games, including a rather inexplicable 68-61 loss to a very average Purdue team( 7-6) Wednesday night in the conference opener for both teams. The other loss for the Illini was easier to understand, an 82-73 loss to Missouri in the " Braggin ' Rights " game Dec. 22. Brandon Paul continues @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ game and the Illini continue to fire away from the 3-point line, making 142 of 384 thus far. Ohio State continues to roll along impressively. The Buckeyes ' only losses are to No. 1 Duke and No. 6 Kansas. Ohio State opened conference play Wednesday night by crushing Nebraska 77-44. Forward Deshaun Thomas leads the Buckeyes in scoring( 19.9 points per game) and rebounding( 7.0 rebounds per game). GIM ME FIVE No. 22 Oklahoma State( 10-2) at No. 25 Kansas State( 11-2), 1:30 p.m. today : It 's the Big 12 Conference opener for both teams. Both have a loss to No. 10 Gonzaga in common. Oklahoma State 's only other loss was to Virginia Tech, while Kansas State 's other loss was to No. 2 Michigan. No. 10 Gonzaga( 14-1) at Santa Clara( 12-3), 8 p.m. today : Santa Clara played well against No. 1 Duke into the second half last week before succumbing 90-77. Gonzaga has put together a solid resume with quality @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Seton Hall( 12-2) at No. 21 Notre Dame( 12-1), noon today : Two teams with gaudy records but few victories of substance square off in a Big East matchup. Notre Dame did beat Kentucky 64-50, and its lone loss was to Saint Joseph 's in overtime. Seton Hall has losses to Washington and LSU. Iowa( 11-3) at No. 2 Michigan( 14-0), noon Sunday, Big Ten Network : Michigan could have its hands full against an Iowa team that gave No. 5 Indiana all it could handle Monday before losing 69-65 in the Big Ten opener for both teams. Iowa has held opponents to 37.4 percent shooting from the field. Temple( 10-2) at No. 6 Kansas( 11-1), 4:30 p.m. Sunday, CBS : Kansas has won 10 consecutive games since a 67-64 loss to Michigan State. Temple 's losses have come to Duke and Canisius. The Owls ' signature victory thus far came when they knocked off Syracuse 83-79. Compiled by Charles Bennett, for @ @ 
