4136241 HARRISBURG -- In December 2012, high school students across the state sat down in their classrooms, picked up No. 2 pencils -- or went to a computer -- and began taking the latest round of state standardized testing. Standardized testing in Pennsylvania is nothing new. It has a long, and sometimes controversial, history in the Keystone State. Tests are used not only to assess what students know, but they have increasingly come to reflect the perceived quality of the schools the students attend. In a few short years, they also will determine -- at least in part -- whether a student can graduate from high school. Last year, under the incoming Keystone Exam system, each school was given a combined score -- comprised of standardized testing scores in math, English and science -- as well as extra credit for attendance, test participation and other factors. Those scores were then put online, part of the state Department of Education 's new " School Performance Profiles. " Most suburban schools -- especially those in the midstate -- did very well. But the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ than half of the high school students who took the science Keystone Exam in biology failed to score proficient or advanced. And the low scores were n't just in the state 's urban schools, which have traditionally struggled with standardized testing, but also at suburban high schools. When the latest round of state testing data was released, Hampton High School in Allegheny County scored among the highest in the state for science, math and English, yet it fell in the overall rankings. Panicked real estate agents called the school district, concerned that demand for houses -- and property values -- could drop. Such is the power of the standardized test to justify, however basely, the property tax bills paid by the 80 percent of the population who do not have children in public schools. The emphasis placed on the scores also reflect our societal love of numbers, of the quantification and metrification of ephemeral things like " learning " or " success. " It also drives educators nuts. Education experts say people should not @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ -- at least not yet. " It is a baseline, " said Steve Robinson with the Pennsylvania School Boards Association. " So until we have next year 's data, it 's just a starting point. " The tests in 2012 were the second time students took the new Keystone Exam in biology, and for educators, their second look at what the state was assessing. And that, said Mr. Robinson and Todd Hosterman, also with the school boards association, might have a lot to do with the scores. " Districts are just now in the process of getting curriculum in line with the Keystones, " Mr. Robinson said. " I think that 's part of the process. Districts need to know what 's on the exam to align their curriculum. " As schools figure out what content the test considers, they will shift their curriculum to either focus on that content, review it or possibly teach it more closely to the test date. Mr. Hosterman pointed out that scores across all subject @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the imagination, across the board, and I think that shows the newness of the experience. " Both said they would expect to see the scores rise over the next few years. The state Department of Education itself has warned that the Keystone scores will be lower than the PSSA scores they replace -- in part, it said, because the exams are more rigorous and because they are designed to test a greater depth of knowledge. Still, acting Education Secretary Carolyn Dumaresq said, the science scores were " not as good as we would like. " " But it 's not a surprise, " she said, pointing out that because of federal requirements, all 11th-graders took the exam, not just those who were taking biology. " So you 're looking at children in 11th grade that may never had had the course, but they had to take it in order to meet the federal requirements, " she said. But Ms. Dumaresq was bullish about the future, especially as school districts and students @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ you 're going to start to see those scores go up, " she said. Not everyone so readily agrees. At West Chester University, education researcher David Brown said he did n't think the low scores were due to just the newness of the exams. " I 'm not surprised, given all the emphasis we placed on math and literacy, " he said. Prior to the Keystones, and during No Child Left Behind, schools were primarily assessed on math and literacy. That emphasis, Mr. Brown contends, led to a decline in time spent on science education, especially at the elementary school level. In other words, the standardized tests were determining what content -- and subjects -- were prioritized in public schools. " We 've lost the profession, and now it belongs to McGraw Hill and the others who sponsor these tests, " Mr. Brown said. Despite his concerns about standardized testing and how they affect what 's taught in classrooms, Mr. Brown said he was n't really concerned about the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ well in science, " he said. " We invent things, people buy them from us. So I do n't sit around and worry, ' Oh my God, we 're falling behind in science. ' " How are we doing across the globe? We 're doing pretty well. " At Hampton High School last year, more than 85 percent of the students who took the biology Keystone Exam scored proficient or advanced, which in laymen 's terms means they scored at grade level or above. Soon the students will be tested not only in biology but also in chemistry. That means the school 's chemistry teachers have to start preparing them now for a test they will take next year -- without knowing exactly what the test will cover. It 's a frustrating challenge for science department head and physics teacher Ken Kemmer. " As educators, we 're trying to get our kids ready for something we 've never seen, " he said. Not only does he have to change his curriculum, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ as soon as he figures it out, the ground will likely shift. If the past is any indication, he said, the Keystones either will be modified or dropped entirely in a couple of years in favor of another system of standardized testing. " It 's always something new, " he said. Meanwhile, there 's only a finite amount of information he can push through his classroom. At some point, he said, you ca n't keep adding, you have to eliminate something. " What 's worth more to the kids -- passing the Keystones or learning something they may or may not need later in life? " The Keystones are designed to measure what the state believes the students need to know, based on input from a broad spectrum of Pennsylvania educators, employers and those in higher education. They are required for graduation. It 's a simple equation compared to the complex science formulas displayed around Mr. Kemmer 's classroom. 
