4136941 ST. LOUIS Heather Koenig, 45, had heard about the event on toxic stress from the television and made her way to it from south St. Louis County. She 'd been struggling for nearly a decade with back pain and traumatic surgeries, financial collapse from her medical bills and severe anxiety from being isolated by her illness. On a wall-sized white board, she wrote her thoughts about stress in pink marker for everyone to see : Yesterday is History/ TOMORROW is a Mystery/ TODAY is a GIFT/ That is Why We Call it the PRESENT. " I used to mourn my old self so much that I would just dwell on the past or just hope for the future. And I just was n't enjoying the present moment in my life, " she explained. " I feel if I try to stay present and just enjoy laughter or playing a game of tag with the kids - I find with that I do n't get as overwhelmed by my stress. " Koenig 's words were among dozens of thoughts people shared last month on flip charts, a @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ West End event to kick off Alive and Well STL, a regional health initiative to tackle the medical and behavioral toll of trauma and toxic stress in the region. The initiative is being sponsored by the St. Louis Regional Health Commission because, as CEO Robert Fruend puts it, St. Louis is stressed-out. It 's long been known that too much stress can be unhealthy, but research increasingly points to the toxicity of unrelenting stress - particularly among the poor - causing chronic illnesses, shorter life spans and, now, increasing evidence of adverse brain development in children. " We know stress kills. The science is clear. It kills in large numbers, " Fruend said. No image tells this better than a map by ZIP code of the average life expectancy in St. Louis County. In Kinloch, a poor, segregated African-American area, males live on average to be 56. In a much wealthier and mostly white Wildwood, it 's 91. Further telling is a decade of research by the Regional Health @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ areas, wide disparities remain among whites and African-Americans, who as a group live more frequently in the region 's poorer areas. CONNECTING THE DOTS More than two years in the making, Alive and Well STL took on further intensity after violence and protests erupted last summer in response to the fatal shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson and the trauma that ensued. Protesters, media and civic leaders began to connect the dots regarding the long-existing toxic stress in Ferguson and many other poor aeas of north St. Louis County. Much of that stress is caused by poverty, racism, segregation and economic inequity in St. Louis County 's patchwork of communities, said Bethany Johnson-Javois, managing director of the Ferguson Commission established by Gov. Jay Nixon. Last month, on the heels of nine racially motivated killings inside a historically black church in Charleston, Johnson-Javois dedicated about half of the Ferguson Commission 's regular meeting to break-out discussions on toxic stress. " We kept hearing about and we keep hearing about fatigue - fatigue that is coming @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ to me the commission needs to be sensitive to our community members, " she said. Fruend said toxic stress could be found regionwide, be it a middle-class subdivision in St. Charles County coping with the death of a teen from a heroin overdose or in the Canfield Green apartments where Brown was shot. Fruend said every community needed informed people - the initiative calls them ambassadors - to take the lead and identify stress and reach out to those in need. WHAT HAPPENED TO YOU? ' Proponents of Alive and Well often cite a key mantra in dealing with the issue : " We want to stop asking, What 's wrong with you, ' and instead ask, What happened to you? ' " said Dr. Heidi Miller of Family Care Health Centers, who primarily treats the poor with severe chronic conditions. Miller said the current medical model was n't doing a great job reducing life-threatening diseases among the poor because it did n't focus on the root cause of the illnesses - the debilitating stresses of food scarcity @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ trauma. It 's critical that the health field recognize these stresses, she said. A growing body of research suggests that multiple adverse childhood experiences such as abuse or neglect, or toxic stress associated with poverty, can lead to conditions such as high blood pressure, stroke, heart disease and diabetes in adulthood. Much of it is triggered by excessive production of stress hormones, which causes inflammation in the body, boosts blood sugar production and damages the immune system. Furthermore, a person 's response to constant stress - often referred to as flight-or-fight response - can lead to negative and misunderstood behaviors. Compounding those issues is the link that research is making between the stressful burdens of poverty and adverse brain development in children. In St. Louis, Joan Luby, a psychiatrist and researcher who founded Washington University School of Medicine 's Early Emotional Development Program, has been following a group of 300 children for 15 years to study early-onset depression. Of those children, Luby said, about 90 were identified as being poor @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ paper in The Journal of the American Medical Association, Pediatrics, used brain imaging suggesting those children in poverty without emotional supports had smaller white and gray matter as well as smaller volumes in the regions of the brain known as the hippocampus and amygdala - areas that help regulate emotions, decision-making and hormonal production. The study conversely found children in poverty with more positive nurturing had brain volumes on par with those from less-stressed situations. " I think the thing that is probably most frustrating about it, " said Luby, " is that we really understand it and even know this is actually preventable. So the science should be informing the public policy for prevention, but right now, it 's not. " Fruend said the toxic stress initiative was a step in that direction although other public investments needed to be made to help the poor and the sick. The commission has so far spent about $120,000 in reserve funding to sponsor events and entice partnerships with various mental health and social services groups. Alive and Well @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in efforts to train professionals in medicine, education, corrections and other human services fields to better understand and interact with people coping with deep stress and emotional baggage of past traumatic events. Fruend said the St. Louis initiative aimed to make the entire region " trauma informed " - so residents are aware of toxic stress and equipped to help themselves and others combat those stresses. It has recruited area pastors and church volunteers who participated in training to develop a " mental health first aid kit " to help others develop resilience to stresses. The initiative wants other volunteer groups to sign on. In a way, Fruend said, it 's a wake-up call for people to remember that the right type of concern and small gestures could extend somebody 's life. --- ALIVE AND WELL STL An initiative to help the St. Louis region avoid the negative health consequences of stress. FOR MORE INFORMATION : Go to **35;31203;TOOLONG 
