4132141 Commissioners effectively drew a line Tuesday : No more gun shows at the Travis County Exposition Center without background checks. Seeking to close the so-called " gun show loophole, " Travis County wants a show promoter to require private gun sales to go through a background check. Saxet Gun Shows, which has held shows at the county-owned Expo Center nearly every month since 2010, refused the county 's terms to extend the contract past January. Commissioners would n't sign a contract Tuesday without the requirement. " If you use a public facility to sell guns, we really ought to have background checks done. Or do n't use the facility, " County Judge Sam Biscoe, chairman of the commissioners, told reporters after the meeting. Still, gun shows are allowed elsewhere in the Austin area, and Saxet could seek another venue. Other groups hold gun shows at the North Austin Event Center and the Cedar Park Center, for instance. Saxet will host one more show at the Expo Center, Jan. 25-26, under its old contract with the county. Federally licensed @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ check to make sure a buyer is n't a felon or otherwise ineligible to buy a gun. But, as part of the gun show loophole, private sellers - people selling guns from their own collections - do n't have to conduct a background check. Those private sales account for about 10 to 15 percent of the transactions at a gun show, said Todd Beiter, who owns Saxet Gun Shows. In a brief phone interview Tuesday, he noted that neither state nor federal law requires background checks by private sellers, and " it is not really my job to infringe on anyone 's rights. " In a 1,200-word letter to the commissioners Monday morning, Beiter also said the requirement would be " an unfunded mandate, " leading to extra costs for private gun sales and might force those transactions outside the show. Gerald Daugherty was the lone commissioner to propose signing the contract without requiring background checks. Under the proposed deal, Saxet would have paid $114,000 to hold eight shows at the Expo Center from March @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ is a big enough problem with gun shows to where you 've got to impose something on someone who 's never had to do it before or does n't want to do it, " Daugherty said in an interview. Biscoe said county officials proposed various terms, including requiring all sellers be federally licensed( which keeps out people selling from their own collections) ; requiring unlicensed sellers to run background checks on buyers ; lowering the rent for the Expo Center to offset any loss in revenue from requiring background checks ; or requiring background checks for a single show as a " pilot program. " Biscoe also said he wanted to " suspend " negotiations on the contract, but no other commissioners supported that move. Commissioner Margaret Gmez later said in an interview she would have liked to see the show continue with background checks but did n't believe the county could require them. Commissioner Ron Davis, through an aide, declined to be interviewed. Commissioner Bruce Todd, who left the meeting minutes before the gun show discussions @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ he supported the terms for the show that Biscoe outlined but did n't support Biscoe 's motion to halt negotiations. Tuesday 's move comes more than a year after local activists made a push to stop the Saxet show from continuing in the wake of the Newtown, Conn., elementary school shooting, which reignited a national debate about gun control and the gun show loophole. County commissioners took no action stopping the show last year, after their attorneys said they believed it would be illegal to ban the events from county facilities. But this year 's effort was different, Biscoe said. Gun shows pose more safety concerns than typical events and, as such, extra terms and conditions can be required, he said. In the case of the Saxet show, that would be requiring background checks. Several states have made laws to close the gun show loophole. According to the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, six states - California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, New York and Rhode Island - as well @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ sales, whether they 're from licensed dealers or not. Two more - Illinois and Oregon - require checks for all sales at gun shows, the center reported. The gun show can require private sellers to run the background checks through federally licensed dealers, a procedure the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives laid out in March, according to Frances Schenkkan, a board member of Texas Gun Sense. Such checks typically take minutes. While dealers do n't pay to run each check, there are associated costs such as having to act as a middleman for the sale and paying taxes on the transaction, said Joe McBride, of McBride 's Guns in Austin. McBride, who does n't take his shop to the Saxet show, said by phone he thinks it 's fine for private buyers and sellers to conduct transactions without background checks : " How is that a threat to anybody? That 's a constitutional right. " The meeting Tuesday was also different from last year 's gun show-stopping efforts @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ property and dozens of county residents lined up and gave commissioners hours of testimony. This year 's discussions focused more narrowly on the question of requiring background checks on all sales, a prominent feature of legislation that died in the U.S. Senate last year despite wide support from Americans, according to various polls. Still, Biscoe said, he expects lawsuits. " Saxet Gun Shows operate by state and federal law. That has never been in question, " Alice Tripp, lobbyist for the Texas State Rifle Association, told reporters. " The only person that would be harmed by this county commissioners ' requirement is Todd Beiter, the owner of Saxet Gun Shows. " That is, a person selling a gun without requiring a background check wo n't be breaking any laws, but Saxet would be in trouble with the county for allowing such a transaction to happen, Tripp said. Supporters of the show decried background checks as unnecessary and said the vast majority of illegal gun transactions happen outside gun shows. However, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ federal prison for selling machine guns and other firearms without a license in California recently sold guns at Saxet 's San Antonio show, the San Antonio Express-News reported in September. One rifle he sold ended up in the hands of one of Mexico 's most violent drug lords, Miguel Angel " Z-40 " Trevio Morales, the newspaper reported. The seller was charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm, the newspaper reported. Contact Farzad Mashhood at 512-445-3972. Twitter : @fmashhood 
