4137441 The heart of Chapman University is a veritable garden of lore - every plaque, fountain and edifice serving as a signpost pointing to some amount of colorful history. Although many of these buildings bear the name of someone significant to the campus, there are many others - often nearer to the edges of campus - that are just as rich in history or more despite their more unassuming names. Kris Olsen is the vice president of campus planning and operations at Chapman. As overseer of all the building acquisitions and construction projects on campus, he has acquired a head full of history and facts on Chapman 's many history-rich buildings. Why does Chapman take the effort to make use of such buildings as they are, as opposed to scrapping them in favor of something that might be easier? For the answer, Olsen turns to former President Theodore " Teddy " Roosevelt, who said, " Do what you can, with what you have, where you have it. " Olsen said that Chapman 's reasoning behind reusing these buildings can be broken down into two simple @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the buildings, which contain a cultural, architectural and physical record of local history. The second, more practical reason is even simpler : making good use of all the work that was already put into the edifice. " The most sustainable building is an existing building, " Olsen said. " This is due to the fact that reusing your existing building and its materials preserves the embodied energy that went into the manufacture of the original materials and assembling them on-site. " There 's a precise process for assessing buildings with historic value, Olsen said. " The first step we do is we bring on board an outside historic resource group to review the history of the property, " Olsen said. " We do our own research, but we bring on professionals so we know exactly what we 're dealing with - when the buildings were built, at what point were additions made to it, what 's original and what 's non-original. " This research goes into creating what 's known as a HABS/HAER report @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. This report documents the cultural and historical resources of a building. Chapman takes the report and crafts its desired project around it, using it to determine what areas need restoration and which are n't historically significant. More than a few buildings have had this treatment over the years, with the university 's work often returning them to their former glory following years of neglect. Olsen highlighted a few of Chapman 's historic buildings, sharing stories of their pasts. California Wire and Cable Co. /Anaconda Wire and Cable Co. 1922 1998 2014 $11.2 million Though it sports a hyper-modern interior equipped with everything today 's digital art student could ask for, the Digital Media Arts Center 's classical brick exterior belies its position among Chapman 's historic buildings. The DMAC building itself was once Anaconda 's manufacturing plant and is listed on both the National Register of Historic Places and the California Register of Historical Resources. The complex sprawled out across the surrounding area. Walking into the DMAC building at first gives an immediate sense of modernity, but @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the building 's history - preserved and incorporated into the new design. The large glass-and-steel frame windows flood the halls with light during the day, the sky lights open to the moonlit sky at night and even some of the beams and air ducts that weave their way throughout the building are all left just as they were nearly a century ago. Though the DMAC building is most strongly associated with Anaconda, it is n't the only place on campus that shares a history with the wire and cable operation. The brick facade near the tennis courts is another descendant of Anaconda that eventually will be incorporated into the school 's upcoming Recreation Complex. The Time Warner Building 1954 2011 2014 $350,000 The building takes its name from famed architect Welton Becket, who designed many notable buildings around Southern California in the 20th century. They include the Capitol Records Tower in Hollywood, Pauley Pavilion at UCLA and the Beverly Hilton Hotel in Beverly Hills. Perhaps less well-known was the Anaconda Office and Recreation Building on Palm Avenue, now @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ was where all the intensive, hands-on labor took place, the Becket Building was where all of Anaconda 's paperwork was managed. After being sold by Anaconda, the building was leased by many parties, most notably Time Warner. Time Warner used the building for all sorts of things over the years - a retail store, a call center and even a hub for the signal. That 's right - anyone in Orange with Time Warner cable most likely has been getting his or her cable from the Becket Building. Though its name was associated with the building, Time Warner always leased the building and never owned it. When Chapman acquired the property in 2011, Time Warner became Chapman 's tenant. Since the purchase, Time Warner has been slowly downscaling its use of the building. The store and call center are gone ; all that remains is the hub, which is in the process of being dismantled. Time Warner plans to completely vacate the building by the end of the month. In the coming @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ temporarily house faculty offices while buildings are renovated elsewhere on campus. Down the road, the Becket Building will find renewed purpose as the newest addition to the university 's film school. The Victorian Manor Tea House 1904 2010 2011 $400,000 The Elliot Alumni House, opened in 2010, is one of the oldest buildings at Chapman. The building first was an elegant Victorian Manor belonging to William and Ella Granger. The Grangers were the founders of First National Bank of Orange and were well-known in their era. Those who wandered the area within the past 10 years or so likely know quite another name for this building : the famed Victorian Manor Tea House, also known as the " purple tearoom. " After the Grangers, the building changed hands several times, spanning a full generation of various businesses and tenants. Not long ago, it came to the hands of a couple who wanted to use it as a tearoom. To help them stand out, they spruced up the old manor so that the Victorian Manor @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ The outside of the manor was painted an extravagant lavender, and the inside was filled with arcane pink decorations and murals. The frilly nature of the tea house was mirrored with an unexpected dark side when it was named one of the most haunted buildings in Orange County by the Haunted Orange Ghost Walk. Rumors made their way around about spirits who would wander the halls, including a ghastly woman in a wedding dress and a young boy who would shuffle silverware around to startle customers. Though the lavish decor in the tea house drew some acclaim, it complicated things for Chapman when it bought the property. Careful research was required to find out what the building actually looked like before the tearoom renovations, and the building was returned to its former appearance - to the best of the university 's ability. The spirits may have been appeased by this return to form, as there have been no reports of any ghostly visitors ever since. The Cypress Street Schoolhouse 1931 2004 2013 $2.8 million It 's an unassuming building @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ this Chapman research facility is - to some - one of the most historically significant buildings in the area. Though now used for research, it once represented the very antithesis of progress - segregation. Once known as the Cypress Street Schoolhouse for Mexican children, the building is the last remaining once-segregated schoolhouse in Southern California. Most of the other schools of this kind were demolished in the years following the Mendez v. Westminster verdict in 1947, which outlawed segregated schools in California. Built in 1931, the Spanish Colonial Revival style building consists of what used to be five classrooms, a principal 's office, a nurse 's office, a custodial closet, two rest rooms and a shower. This layout was recognized during renovations following the building 's purchase by the university. For each classroom and office, Chapman prepared plaques inscribed with the names of those who worked there during the days the building was a schoolhouse. Restoration of the building was no easy task. Despite the building 's significance, its history had been @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ down. Ill-fitting paneling had been introduced and the building 's ceilings had been lowered. Though the building is still not officially registered as a historic place, Chapman knew of its history and decided to treat it like it would any other history-rich locale. Chapman teamed up with the Orange Barrio Historical Society and worked to restore it to just how it looked when students roamed its halls more than 80 years ago. Since the restoration, the historical society has used the building as a meeting place. Chapman is now attempting to have the building listed on the National Register of Historic Places. jwinslow@ocregister.com 
