3007141 <p> Andrew Popper, quoted in the article " White House Plans Reforms to Litigation, " Aug. 13, is the dean for faculty and academic affairs at the Washington School of Law at American University. viet upheavals. House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin and House Democratic Leader Richard Gephardt said the aid should be taken out of a $291 billion defense bill to prevent Soviet chaos that could become a new nuclear threat... Most Americans reject the idea of sending cash to help the Soviet Union, despite the dramatic gains for reformers in the past week, according to a Washington Post/ABC news poll released yesterday... The motorman of a speeding New York City subway train that careened out of control and crashed in the Union Square station Wednesday, killing five passengers, was legally drunk, authorities said. EUROPE The new head of Soviet television, Yegor Yakovlev, pulled the staid nightly newscast Vremya off the air and replaced it with a lively program run by journalists barred from the airwaves by his disgraced predecessor. " Vremya is no longer on the air, " anchorman @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ new program, called TV Inform. " Let 's note that the dictatorship of television ended with the coup, " he said... Soviet Defense Minister Yevgeny Shaposhnikov has predicted that the Soviet army will one day become a professional, volunteer force. Shaposhnikov, appointed last week after the failed coup, ventured the prediction in a country where military chiefs have always insisted that conscription was necessary... A bid to trim President Mikhail Gorbachev 's powers following last week 's abortive coup failed to win approval from the Soviet Parliament yesterday. A paragraph in an omnibus resolution won 237 votes in article-by-article voting, short of the necessary 272 votes( 50 percent plus one) needed for approval. Another article, approved in principle for later debate, suspended the Communist Party throughout the country and ordered a judicial investigation into its leadership 's possible involvement in the coup. The Soviet Parliament also voted yesterday to strip the former chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Anatoly Lukyanov, of his immunity from prosecution to allow his arrest for involvement in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ involvement in the plot, but several officials have accused him of being the behind-the-scenes mastermind of the conspiracy. ASIA AND THE PACIFIC A group of 31 American peace activists, carrying US and Vietnamese flags, began a " peace walk " from Hanoi to Ho Chi Minh City yesterday to protest Washington 's economic and diplomatic embargo against Vietnam. The group, including four Vietnam War veterans, sang " We Shall Overcome " as they started their walk. se in demand but to fleet sales based on concerns that 1992 models will have higher price tags. Belt-tightening individual consumers are not the manufacturers ' primary targets now. " In the past, Detroit has used consumer rebates to entice purchasers, but now they 're offering factory-to-dealer rebates. The dealers are in turn offering very attractive leasing arrangements to consumers. " This development best demonstrates the consumer 's tentativeness, he says : " It 's more economical to lease than to buy. " Not even the aircraft industry, a pillar of US industrial strength, can be @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of military hardware. And even commercial producers are vulnerable. With falling demand from the US, Japan, Britain, and the Netherlands - all countries where the airline industry is shrinking - carriers may cut back on their options to buy planes, Sohn says. The fact that business in general is paring down its reserves does n't mean there will be a big surge in orders for durable goods such as washing machines, televisions, and other big-ticket items, Sohn says. Mr. Forman agrees. " Consumers are still tentative, and businesses are looking to them to take the lead. Businesses are n't stocking up shelves in anticipation of strong consumer demand, " he says. " When inventories are depleted, further sales will necessitate new production. " The negative GNP news on Wednesday renewed hopes on Wall Street. Sales reached record highs with the prospect that the Federal Reserve Board will lower interest rates in order to nudge the economy along. " The Fed has the one lever left, " Sohn says. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the economy, such as housing and consumer spending. But the lower interest rates help if you have a job or you think you 'll have a job in a few years. " A rate reduction, however, is unlikely to lure people affected by massive corporate layoffs or fears of joblessness to buy. Edward Brennan, chairman of financially troubled Sears, Roebuck and Co., says the recession has taken a toll on the company 's revenues, " especially the sale of durable goods, which account for roughly two-thirds of Sears domestic merchandising revenues. " The balance sheet will improve " if improvements in the economy, the housing market, and consumer confidence materialize as anticipated. " The Conference Board index says consumers are " less optimistic in their expectations for the months ahead. " expansion of the victors. In the speeches of Russian leaders... a messianic note can now be distinctively heard. " " Yeltsin 's team are throwing out statements such as ' Russia has always united all the peoples, ' @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ says Viktor Lisitsky, a member of the Soviet parliament from a Russian-populated area of the Ukraine. " Yes, the Russian monarchy united a lot of people, but how did it unite the lands? With cruel and violent methods. " While no one has yet accused Yeltsin of desiring to return to the autocracy of the Czars, there is no mistaking his increasing use of symbols and references to the pre-Bolshevik era. Speaking to a group of Russian emigres on Wednesday, Yeltsin called for a rebirth of " Mother Russia. " " The collapse of the center does not mean the collapse of the country, and especially not of Russia, " he reportedly told them. 
