4128441 LUCERNE, Switzerland -- In 1938, after the annexation of Austria by Germany 's Third Reich, Arturo Toscanini resolved not to return to the Salzburg Festival. Having previously suspended activities in Fascist-controlled Italy and in Germany, the conductor came to Lucerne and on Aug. 25, 1938, led an orchestra of specially chosen musicians in a concert outside the lakeside house where Richard Wagner lived for six years. Seventy-five years to the day later, the Lucerne Festival, which dates its origin to Toscanini 's concert, held a birthday party for itself -- a daylong mini-festival within its own annual monthlong festival. Events were so plentiful it was impossible to attend them all : around 30 in total, including numerous concerts of about an hour 's length that were held in or near the festival 's performing venue, the elegant Culture and Congress Center on Lake Lucerne, and films, youth concerts and events at the city 's Museum of Art. Choosing what to attend was no easy matter. Performers were drawn from two illustrious organizations indigenous to the festival -- the Lucerne Festival Orchestra @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ festival 's crown jewel for 10 years, and the elite Lucerne Festival Academy Orchestra, an ensemble of young musicians that specializes in new music -- as well as from the renowned visiting orchestras and performers that give the festival its perennial allure. The Lucerne Festival Academy Orchestra was established in 2004 with Pierre Boulez as its guiding force, but the conductor David Robertson presided for a pulsating, high-precision account of Steve Reich 's 45-minute " Desert Music, " an invigorating exercise in Minimalist style in which the Academy Orchestra was joined by Synergy Vocals, a 10-singer ensemble. Mr. Reich treats the voices instrumentally, at least at first, as waves of repeated patterns unfold, set off by the emergence of new patterns, often engagingly initiated by solo violins in syncopation. I had given up on understanding William Carlos Williams 's text, so it was a revelation when words( obviously apt in this musical context) came through like a beacon : " It is a principle of music to repeat the theme. Repeat and repeat @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Chamber Orchestra, which supplies many players of the Lucerne Festival Orchestra, performed under the direction of the young Spanish conductor Pablo Heras-Casado in Beethoven 's Fifth Symphony. Starting with a statement of the opening motive that gave short shrift to the first fermata, the performance was loud and fast, but the orchestra seemed swept up by the conductor 's energy, and so did the audience. More refined was Mozart 's irresistible Woodwind-Piano Quintet in E flat( K. 452) performed by the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam 's Lucas Macas Navarro( oboe), Olivier Patey( clarinet), Gustavo Nez( bassoon), Fons Verspaandonk( horn) and Jeroen Bal( piano). Mr. Bal could have given a bit more at the piano to counter the pungent winds, but still the performance was a delight, as was the group 's performance of Poulenc 's Sextet for Piano and Wind Quintet( Op. 100), in which the flutist Emily Beynon also participated -- a sparkling example of the composer 's cultivated wit @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ birthday festivities was the festival 's string quartet in residence, the Jack Quartet, a brilliant American ensemble that specializes in new music. At an earlier concert it gave the world premiere of Plainsound String Quartet " Holy Howl "( Op. 57) by the German composer Wolfgang von Schweinitz, which sounded more like an experiment with raw musical materials than a coherent work. Slow moving instrumental lines variously intersected to produce sonorities that were sometimes consonant, sometimes dissonant but typically rich in texture. Given the scarcity of rhythmic pulse in the 40-minute work, it was remarkable that the members of the quartet were able to keep together with so much apparent expertise. For the final birthday concert, the Lucerne Festival Orchestra appeared in reduced numbers to play Mozart and Rossini. The works by Mozart, performed without a conductor, included the Divertimento for Stings in F Major( K. 138), an unassuming work that nevertheless included arresting moments for the orchestra 's burnished strings. Mozart 's lightweight Concerto for Flute, Harp and Orchestra @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Zoon( flute) and Letizia Belmondo( harp) as soloists. Word had it that Mr. Abbado might make a surprise appearance to conduct the program 's final work, the Overture to Rossini 's " L'Italiana in Algeri, " but it was heard in a nicely balanced performance led by his assistant, Gustavo Gimeno. Notwithstanding that disappointment, this was a richly rewarding day, and those in attendance paid not one Swiss franc : all the events were free. Furthermore, Mr. Abbado was very much present the night before to conduct the Festival Orchestra in two uncompleted masterpieces of the symphonic repertoire, Schubert 's Symphony No. 7 in B minor( D. 759, " Unfinished "), and Bruckner 's Symphony No. 9 in D minor. Mr. Abbado is also a birthday celebrant this year, having turned 80 in June. His fragile appearance is a reminder of the health scare that is now more than a dozen years behind him, but his performances remain astounding. The Schubert unfolded with an unhurried spaciousness that @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the strings, supporting the first theme played by oboe and clarinet, had such precision and shapeliness that it seemed like noteworthy thematic material in its own right. Over all, the symphony had an imposing splendor that hinted at the Brucknerian majesty to come. Having conducted nearly all the Mahler symphonies with the Festival Orchestra, Mr. Abbado is now well into a Bruckner cycle, of which his performance of the Ninth will surely occupy an exalted place. As with his Mahler, Mr. Abbado 's way with Bruckner is a model of elegance, refinement and structural clarity. Unlike Schubert 's symphony, which clearly presupposes more music to come, the Bruckner, as it exists, can be viewed as a well balanced whole, in which its short yet insistently aggressive, even violent Scherzo is framed by two grandly paced movements in which the word " feierlich "( solemn or ceremonial) is prominent among Bruckner 's performance instructions. Mr. Abbado 's luminous reading bore this out. At times the music, particularly in the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ current than he allowed, but the beauty and logic of the score were revealed with rare insight. The Lucerne Festival runs through Sept. 15. 
