4127441 BEIJING -- As tensions mount with its neighbors over islands in nearby strategic waterways, China has scored some subtle victories, making the United States and its allies increasingly uneasy about the potential for violent confrontations. China 's dispute with Japan over potentially energy-rich islands in the East China Sea, and with the Philippines over an island that China has effectively blocked to Filipino vessels, will be central in talks between Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Chinese leaders in Beijing on Tuesday evening and Wednesday, American and Chinese officials said. " We will need the nations of the region to work collaboratively together to resolve disputes -- without coercion, without intimidating, without threats and, certainly, without the use of force, " Mrs. Clinton said on Monday evening after arriving in Indonesia 's capital, Jakarta. As part of a 10-day, six-nation swing through Asia that may include her last visit to China as secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton and her senior aides said the United States would urge China to enter discussions with its neighbors over conflicting territorial claims in the South China @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ the regional bloc, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and since Mrs. Clinton 's last visit to Beijing in May, the Chinese have acted more boldly in the maritime disputes. Mrs. Clinton received support from Indonesia 's foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa, who has scrambled in recent weeks to forge a unified position among the association 's members to create a code of conduct intended to avert clashes over the various claims. " Absent a code of conduct, absent a diplomatic process, we can be certain of more incidents around the region, " he said, appearing with her. With recent developments, however, it is not clear that China is interested in any such code. The official news media in China has adopted an increasingly confident tone in the South China Sea disputes, asserting that the United States should accept that it is in decline. Editorials have warned the United States not to try to benefit from territorial disputes there and in the East China Sea, where an age-old dispute over islands near rich @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Japan, a treaty ally with Washington. These islands are known in China as the Diaoyu, and in Japan as the Senkakus. Speaking on Monday at a regular Foreign Ministry press briefing in Beijing, a spokesman, Hong Lei, said the islands were " inherent " parts of China since " ancient times. " Without naming the United States, he warned outside parties against meddling. In a move that was interpreted as a modest victory for China, Japan 's prime minister, Yoshihiko Noda, sent a letter last week to China 's president, Hu Jintao, calling for " calm handling " by both sides. The letter was seen as a conciliatory gesture after a group of 10 activists backed by Tokyo businessmen, who say they want to buy the islands, organized a landing on the islands on Aug. 19 without permission from the central Japanese authorities. A second group of activists, from the Tokyo metropolitan government, went to the waters near the islands over the weekend, calling themselves a survey team @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ islands. The dispute with the Philippines involves a cluster of reefs and rocks, the Scarborough Shoal, which is called Panatag in the Philippines and Huangyan in China. In May, the Obama administration quietly negotiated a deal that called for Filipino and Chinese vessels to leave the shoal. But the Chinese left behind a rope that still blocks the entrance to the lagoon, said two Asian diplomats familiar with the situation, who declined to be named per diplomatic protocol. The Philippines foreign affairs undersecretary, Laura del Rosario, said last Friday that three Chinese vessels remained just outside the lagoon, preventing any Filipino fishing vessels from entering. China has effectively established a new status quo at the shoal and appeared determined not to back down, the two diplomats said. In a public display of displeasure with Washington over the East China Sea disputes, China reacted quickly to a comment last week by the State Department 's spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, that the United States refers to the islands as the Senkakus, as the Japanese @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ control of the government of Japan since they were " part of the reversion of Okinawa " in 1972, and thus fell under the United States-Japan defense treaty. Pressed by a Chinese reporter on whether Washington regarded the islands as part of Japanese territory, Ms. Nuland said, " We do n't take a position on the islands, but we do assert that they are covered under the treaty. " A Chinese specialist on Japan said Ms. Nuland 's comments were unacceptable. " Previously, the United States said it holds no position on sovereignty, " said Hu Lingyuan, the deputy director of the Center for Japanese Studies at Fudan University in Shanghai. " Now it 's contradicting itself. The Chinese people can not accept this. The U.S. is very visibly taking sides with Japan. " Anti-Japanese sentiment has been stoked by full coverage on national television of the Japanese landings on the islands. In small villages and in provincial newspapers, the Japanese were the subject of vilification as people gathered around television sets. Adding @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ of the official car of the Japanese ambassador in China was ripped off last week as it traveled in Beijing. The Japanese press reported that four suspects had been questioned by the Beijing authorities but had not been detained. " It is alarming for Japan that many people praised the attack, calling the suspects heroes, " The Daily Yomiuri wrote in an editorial. A senior State Department official who will be in Beijing with Mrs. Clinton said the main goal of the trip was to calm what has been an inflamed summer across the region. " It is absolutely essential that cooler heads prevail in every capital, " the official said. PHOTO : A rubber boat on a survey ship chartered by Tokyo officials being lowered near Uotsuri, right, one of the islands in the East China Sea at the center of a territorial dispute with China.( PHOTOGRAPH BY KYODO NEWS, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) 
