4127541 " THE AMAZING SPIDER-MAN " BWe 've been here before with Peter Parker, the bright but awkward teen who gets bitten by a radioactive spider and develops extraordinary powers. But " The Amazing Spider-Man " still feels fresh and invigorating, with Andrew Garfield providing a terrific physical performance and Emma Stone portraying Spidey 's first love, Gwen Stacy. The movie takes its time hooking you on an emotional level. It draws you close : then, mayhem.( Rene Rodriguez, Miami Herald) Rated PG-13 for sequences of action and violence. At metro theaters. 2 hours, 16 minutes. " KATY PERRY : PART OF ME " CMaking a serious documentary about aggressively over-the-top pop star Katy Perry might seem a bit like trying to grab hold of a cloud. Yet, directors Dan Cutforth and Jane Lipsitz manage to balance the outlandish with the personal in this 3-D concert film / biography hybrid. " Katy Perry : Part of Me " presents a familiar trajectory, and often tips over into hagiography, but there 's a sympathetic person at its core.( Preston Jones @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ content, strong language, thematic elements, smoking. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 35 minutes. " SAVAGES " BTaylor Kitsch and Aaron Johnson co-star as best friends who got rich quick growing a particularly strong strain of pot. The two live in a spectacular Laguna Beach home with their mutual girlfriend( Blake Lively). Everyone 's happy until the leader of a Mexican cartel( Salma Hayek) tries to expand her territory by taking over their business. Oliver Stone 's film is a lurid, pulpy film noir and the most explosively poppy film he has made in a long time.( Christy Lemire, Associated Press) Rated R for strong brutal and grisly violence, some graphic sexuality, nudity, drug use and language throughout. At metro theaters. 2 hours, 29 minutes. " TO ROME WITH LOVE " CAs awful as this film is --- and the awfulness is unmistakable --- it is, as an experience, not unpleasant. It 's a mess, but it 's Woody Allen. " To @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ disparate sketches, cut into pieces and shuffled. Allen is in the best one, as a former opera director who accidentally discovers a great tenor --- but one who can only sing when he 's in the shower. The worst segment involves Alec Baldwin as a man who meets what might be his younger self( Jesse Eisenberg) and tries to steer him away from a femme fatale. In English and in Italian with English subtitles.( Mick LaSalle, San Francisco Chronicle) Rated R for some sexual references. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 42 minutes. PARENTS GUIDEAside from the profanity, there 's nothing here to scare off younger Woody fans. OK for 12 and up " WHORES ' GLORY " BAustrian filmmaker Michael Glawogger 's documentary about prostitutes around the world is as sad a film as you can possibly see. To experience it is to be haunted by the bleakness and ugliness of prostitution, the hopeless trap of it, and the defeat of love that it represents.( Mick LaSalle, San @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ At Landmark Midtown. 1 hour, 40 minutes. " ABRAHAM LINCOLN, VAMPIRE HUNTER " BVowing vengeance after a vampire kills his mother, Abe Lincoln( Benjamin Walker) learns the skills of vampire-killing while a young law student. The movie is surprisingly entertaining, if you forget everything you know about American history. Based on the best-seller by Seth Grahame-Smith.( Roger Ebert, Universal Press Syndicate) Rated R for violence throughout and brief sexuality. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 45 minutes. " BERNIE " BA gang of colorful gossips ' wry prattle essentially narrates " Bernie. " What drives their fascination is the true-life tale of a mannered mortician, Bernie Tiede( Jack Black), who in 1997 was arrested for killing an elderly millionaire heiress( Shirley MacLaine). The film is a dark comedy that 's not entirely dark and not quite a comedy, either. Directed by Richard Linklater.( Jake Coyle, Associated Press) Rated PG-13 for some violent images and brief strong language. At Regal Tara @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ EXOTIC MARIGOLD HOTEL " BA cast of great Brits of old-age pensioner vintage lights up this adorable comedy about elderly pioneers tackling life 's last great adventure. The conceit in this film of the Deborah Moggach novel is that these folks --- retirees without vast savings --- are the next great " outsourcing " gold mine. India is ready to replace your hips and turn an ancient hotel into a retirement home. Starring Judi Dench, Tom Wilkinson, Maggie Smith, Bill Nighy and Dev Patel. Directed by John Madden.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated PG-13 for sexual content and language. At Lefont Sandy Springs, Regal Tara and GTC Merchants Walk,. 2 hours, 4 minutes. " bRAVE " B+A tomboyish teenage princess named Merida fights her parents ' dictate that she must be betrothed to one of the eldest sons of the kingdom 's most respected families. Yet what propels " Brave " is a genuine belief in the transcendent power of an independent mindset --- it understands and illustrates that you have to define @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ think about pairing off.( Christopher Kelly, Fort Worth Texas Star-Telegram) Rated PG for some scary action and rude humor. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 34 minutes. " The Hunger Games " B Fans of Suzanne Collins ' best-selling trio of novels should be satisfied with the faithfulness of this film, with its propulsive nature and vivid imagery. At its center is Jennifer Lawrence, an ideal choice to play Katniss Everdeen, the heroine in this tale about a futuristic world in which teenagers must fight each other to the death in an exploitative display of national loyalty. Also starring Liam Hemsworth and Josh Hutcherson.( Christy Lemire, Associated Press) Rated PG-13 for intense violent thematic material and disturbing images --- all involving teens. At Regal Town Center. 2 hours, 22 minutes. " HYSTERIA " B-Like the inventors of the device it depicts, " Hysteria " really aims to please. And like an inattentive lover, the film never quite satisfies. The fictionalized story is built around Dr. Mortimer Granville @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ around 1880. The otherwise flat film is brightened by a few funny moments as a couple of Victorian-era British doctors test their new invention.( David Germain, Associated Press) Rated R for sexual content. At Regal Tara. 1 hour, 35 minutes. " THE INTOUCHABLES " B+An amusing, touching and intensely likable French comedy about two mismatched men --- the pitiless punk and the immobile, lonely older man who has no need for sympathy. He knows how bad his condition is. Each man, in his way, is an outcast --- untouchable. And each finds a way, reluctantly, to touch the other 's life. Starring Omar Sy, Francois Cluzet and Anne Le Ny. Written and directed by Olivier Nakache and Eric Toledano.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Unrated, with adult situations, language and themes. French with English subtitles. At Regal Tara. 1 hour, 52 minutes. " Madagascar 3 : Europe 's Most Wanted " B-This animated adventure is a riot of splashy colors @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. The third film in this unlikely animated franchise takes those New York refugees from remote Africa, where they 've been stranded, to Monte Carlo and other points in the Eurozone as they try to get back to the friendly and confining Central Park Zoo. It 's running low on new ideas, though some of the conclusions these critters --- lion, zebra, hippo and giraffe --- reach about their fates may surprise you.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated PG for some mild action and rude humor. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 30 minutes. " MAGIC MIKE " BThis film is a fictionalized spin on star Channing Tatum 's pre-Hollywood years working as a stripper in Florida. Steven Soderbergh 's direction here is like stripping itself --- the selling of a fantasy, a tease. It 's only as the film progresses that the sobering reality of living in this sordid world is stripped bare. Also starring Matthew McConaughey and Alex Pettyfer.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated R for pervasive sexual content, @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ At metro theaters. 1 hour, 49 minutes. " MARVEL 'S THE AVENGERS " A-Iron Man, The Incredible Hulk, Thor and Captain America come together alongside several other friends and foes and with director and co-writer Joss Whedon, they could n't be in better hands. He 's pulled off the tricky feat of juggling a large ensemble cast and giving everyone a chance to shine, of balancing splashy set pieces with substantive ideology.( Christy Lemire, Associated Press) Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of sci-fi violence and action throughout and a mild drug reference. At metro theaters. 2 hours, 23 minutes. " MEN IN BLACK 3 " B+Fifteen years after the original and a decade after the blah sequel, this third installment is the best in the series. Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith are back as anti-alien Agents K and J, and Josh Brolin has a movie-stealing role as the young Agent K, looking and sounding uncannily like Jones. Rick Baker, Hollywood 's top creature maker, creates a gob-smacking gallery @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ in the Apollo 11 moon launch.( Roger Ebert, Universal Press Syndicate) Rated PG-13 for sci-fi action violence and brief suggestive content. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 43 minutes. " MOONRISE KINGDOM " B-Wes Anderson takes on young-younger-youngest love and making rebellious square pegs fit into round holes with this film, his latest venture into the dark and the daft. In 1965 a " troubled " orphan and his pen-pal love take off on their own. " Moonrise " is an uneasy blend of winking nostalgia, innocent first love remembered and sentimentalizing the " different. " It 's very much an adult film.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated PG-13 for sexual content and smoking. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 34 minutes. " PEOPLE LIKE US " B-This film is a well-acted weeper that walks an unsteady line between the emotional and the darkly comical. It 's about a guy who realizes he has a half-sister, and who injects himself into her life without explaining who he is. He befriends her @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ up to help her financially. Since he 's the handsome and charming Chris Pine and she 's the fetching and approachable Elizabeth Banks, somebody is sure to get the wrong idea.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated PG-13 for language, some drug use and brief sexuality. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 58 minutes. " PROMETHEUS " B-Ridley Scott 's " Prometheus " plays like the " Alien " franchise 's greatest hits, using plot points, situations, versions of characters and themes from those films to back-engineer his way into the day humans first ran into the ultimate alien killing machine. It 's a good-looking film with a first-rate cast. But " Prometheus " is to " Alien " what " 2010 " was to " 2001 : A Space Odyssey. " It 's the difference between a masterpiece and a merely watchable revision of that masterpiece. Starring Noomi Rapace and Michael Fassbender.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated R for sci-fi violence including some intense images, and brief language. At metro @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ AGES " CThe all-star cast gets into this film, the big-screen version of the jukebox musical set to ' 80s " hair metal, " but the filmmakers ca n't stop mocking the music and the era long enough to let the picture pay off. It 's enough to make you " stop believin '. " Starring Tom Cruise, Julianne Hough, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Alec Baldwin and Mary J. Blige.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated PG-13 for sexual content, suggestive dancing, some heavy drinking, and language. At metro theaters. 2 hours, 3 minutes. " safety not guaranteed " BA big hit at this year 's Sundance Film Festival, this film is exactly what independent films should be yet rarely are. It 's brisk and assured and never begs the audience 's indulgence. The movie is, at every moment, either funny or pushing the story forward, or both. An inventor places an ad for a companion on a time-traveling expedition and draws the attention of a magazine writer.( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ language including some sexual references. At Regal Tara. 1 hour, 25 minutes. " SEEKING A FRIEND FOR THE END OF THE WORLD " BThe End Times are a tricky time for love : That 's the gist of this film, a half-tender portrait of two very lonely hearts in the closing weeks of humanity 's run on Earth. The first half of the film is darkly comical but the second is sweet and serious. It 's hard to reconcile the two. Starring Steve Carell and Keira Knightley.( Amy Biancolli, Houston Texas Chronicle) Rated R for language including sexual references, some drug use and brief violence. At Mansell Crossing and Cinebistro. 1 hour, 41 minutes. " SNOW WHITE AND THE HUNTSMAN " BA more lively re-imagining of the classic tale than " Mirror Mirror, " this film is more sword and sorcery, battles and swordfights, murder and revenge. But for all the excitement of the visually striking action fantasy set, it 's the familiar story elements that work best. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Ray Winstone, Ian McShane and Bob Hoskins. Directed by Rupert Sanders.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of violence and action, and brief sensuality. At metro theaters. 2 hours and 4 minutes. " TED " BMark Wahlberg stars as John, whose wish as a lonely kid in the ' 80s turned his Christmas-morning teddy bear into a walking, talking friend for life. Decades later, the two are still best buddies living together in Boston. In a lot of ways, Seth MacFarlane 's " Ted " feels like a live-action, big-screen version of " Family Guy " with its pop-culture references and inappropriate racial humor, flashbacks and non sequiturs.( Christy Lemire, Associated Press) Rated R for crude and sexual content, pervasive language and some drug use. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 45 minutes. PARENTS GUIDE Seriously off-limits for 13-and-unders, even though they could be the very ones who 'd find this juvenile humor funny. " THAT 'S MY BOY " DThis is @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Live " skits and " The Hangover " with every ugly Adam Sandler laugher ever made. Sandler stars as a man who became famous for an illegal fling with his teacher. He wants to stage a reunion with his estranged son on a TV show. He has made worse movies, but never one as grotesque as this.( Roger Moore, McClatchy-Tribune) Rated R for crude sexual content throughout, nudity, pervasive language and some drug use. At Regal Town Center. 1 hour, 51 minutes. " TYLER PERRY 'S MADEA 's WITNESS PROTECTION " D An investment company officer is set up to take the fall for a Ponzi scheme. He and his family enter the witness protection program at the home of Madea. Rudimentary filmmaking and wobbly acting have never kept Perry 's films from hitting the upper reaches of the box office and probably wo n't stop this one. Perry makes ' em fast, cheap and profitable. That 's great if you 're his studio, but pretty exasperating if you 're @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Levy and Denise Richards.( Rafer Guzman, Newsday) Rated PG-13 for some crude sexual remarks and brief drug references. At metro theaters. 1 hour, 54 minutes. " YOUR SISTER 'S SISTER " A-Lynn Shelton 's appealing comedy is an actor 's movie, offering the small-scale pleasures of a good story well-told. Iris( Emily Blunt) sends her grieving friend Jack( Mark Duplass) to her family 's cabin for solitude and self-examination. But Iris ' sister Hannah( Rosemarie DeWitt) and an unexpected sexual encounter between the two becomes very awkward when Iris shows up.( Moira Macdonald, Seattle Times) Rated R for language and some sexual content. At Landmark Midtown. 1 hour, 30 minutes. Parents Guide The AJC wants to help parents make the best choices for their children 's entertainment. PARENTS GUIDE generally highlights popular PG-13 and R-rated movies your kids may be interested in seeing and is a feature by Roger Moore of McClatchy-Tribune. 
