4138141 Cities transfer tax money to wealthy football team owners In their infinite wisdom, the Washington politicians gave an antitrust exemption to the football owners. The owners took advantage of this gift by our lawmakers. They leveraged their monopoly and promoted a demand for their product that exceeded their supply. The result was their product became more valuable just by virtue of a contrived scarcity. The team 's players may compete on the field but the team owners do n't. They share revenues and do not compete, as do normal businesses, to increase the availability of their product. They dictate terms to TV/radio networks, cable providers and merchandisers who, in turn, pass the increased costs onto their advertisers and eventually to us the consumers. We pay even if we choose not watch their product. Cities find themselves bidding up their costs of acquiring a team because many cities want teams, but there are only a few teams available. As taxpayers, we pay again. Local politicians fawn over team owners and can not shovel money at them fast enough to ensure a local @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ about themselves. Until the league is told to expand, and add more teams, this warped, irrational market will continue unchecked. The value of teams will rise, regardless of the quality of their product. Cities will continue to transfer taxpayer funds to very wealthy owners. Owners will switch localities on a whim, restarting the bidding cycle. Cities will become increasingly impoverished. The caesars of ancient Rome thought that by providing bread and circuses to the plebeians they could avoid discontent and uprisings. Is this what our local leaders really think about us? Malcolm D. Spence Florissant Media need to report cost overruns, deficiencies in military aircraft The editorial " Bombed away "( Nov. 1) shows how there is a political dynamic at work of convoluted nature and, I suppose, influence-dealing. Historically big aircraft manufacturers tended to be Navy or Air Force suppliers. McDonnell Douglas then Boeing supplied the finest and most superior Navy aircraft. Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman were Air Force suppliers. Without getting into the political argument @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ F-35 that McDonnell/Boeing lost are huge financial if not operational failures. However, these contracts seemed to be for Air Force awards regardless of their aircraft 's poor past performance. History was apparently ignored in those program awards. Neither Lockheed nor Northrop produced supersonic aircraft since the F-100. It is shocking that the hundreds of billions of dollars in cost overruns in the F-22, B-2 and F-35 programs gets little media or congressional attention. Those planned aircraft quantities were reduced in number purchased because of cost overruns. The editorial is correct that Northrop 's B-2 bomber never achieved operational design requirements. So now the company gets the new B-3 bomber? The radar-evading graphite composite structure was in many ways so defective it now has to be refurbished after every mission because of surface deterioration. Boeing builds these aircraft composite structures every day for commercial airplanes. The B-2 is also by necessity housed in air conditioned and environmentally controlled hangars between missions because of surface deterioration. No, there is a much greater and shocking story to be told @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @. I wish the Post-Dispatch and its news cohorts would publish the numbers for us all to see. Ron Jones Alton Republican front-runners are unelectable In Eugene Robinson 's column " Was the third debate Bush 's last stand? "( Nov. 1), he states that " All the politicians are still playing second fiddle to a real estate mogul and a retired neurosurgeon who somehow have stolen the Republican Party. " Donald Trump and Dr. Ben Carson have not stolen anything. The Republican Party is on loan to this comic relief until the people finally realize the two are unelectable. In the meantime, the debates are fun to watch. Millie Johanningmeier Overland Iran deal could create some stability in Middle East In response to the letter " Deal with Iran may lead us to disaster "( Oct. 30), I must ask how much research was done on the deal. The nuclear deal includes the prohibition of enriching uranium to a state where it could be used for bomb capability. The United Nations has a right @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ensure the enrichment levels are correct. In addition to the restrictions against a bomb, Iran has long pleaded for a right to have nuclear energy. With this deal, they finally get that and some stability with the sanctions being lifted. My question is, would you rather give Iran a chance to become stable and successful, giving a turbulent area of the world some stability, or throw another country into an impoverished power struggle? Also, if Iran does n't follow the agreement, all sanctions will immediately snap back into place. So there 's plenty for Iran to gain here. Give the country a chance. It 's time we stop babysitting the Middle East and some stability is created. Adam Brown St. Louis Illinois governor holds state budget hostage It is a shame that Illinois citizens allowed a wealthy Republican to become our governor. Did n't they expect that such a person would hold the state budget hostage for his pro-business/wealthy agenda? Did n't they know that such a person would n't care about the @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ intelligent voters who voted against him. There just were n't enough of us, I guess. Don Ogle Granite City O'Fallon, Mo., residents should say no to new Walmart Many residents in O'Fallon, Mo., were distressed to learn recently that the farmland at the corner of Mexico Road and Knaust Road is being sold and that the proposed rezoning would allow the building of a Walmart grocery store and fuel station. Until now this farmland meadow has provided a pastoral buffer between the Chadwyck neighborhood and the noise and rush of Mexico Road traffic. The distress is deeply personal for each individual resident. For some it is the impact of having their peaceful backyard sanctuaries suddenly spoiled by an adjoining parking lot with the resulting 24/7 lights, truck diesel fumes and noise. For others, it is merely the insult of having a Walmart nearby. For all of the residents, the increased traffic will turn an already dangerous neighborhood blind corner exit into a nightmare. Residents ' concerns about increases in crime and the negative effects @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Walmart nearby are backed up by data from recent university studies. The City Planning and Zoning Commission will meet on Thursday evening to review the site plan in preparation for making a decision on the rezoning request. Chadwyck and other local residents will be there to voice their opposition and plead with the Planning and Zoning Commission to deny the rezoning request. It remains to be determined if our voices will be heard. Shannon Labout O'Fallon, Mo. 
