4134841 As an old friend likes to say, opening day of the baseball season in town is the " St. Louis national holiday, " and most of the major local broadcast outlets plan to cover it accordingly. Look for many of the television folks to push professionalism aside for the day and dress in red - some even figure to wear Cardinals gear - as the rah-rah small-town mentality firmly takes hold Monday. Meanwhile, the two outlets that have the rights to broadcast the game locally have extensive coverage planned before and after the contest against Cincinnati that is set to begin at 3:15 p.m. That follows plenty of festivities that include a tribute to former Cardinals great Stan Musial, who died in the offseason. On radio, KMOX( 1120 AM) gets things rolling at 8:30 a.m. when Charlie Brennan and Debbie Monterrey broadcast from the station 's " Kegs and Eggs " pregame party in a parking lot at Spruce and Broadway - appropriately enough next to the Tums building, because that antacid could come in handy for those who consume too much of either featured products. @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Tom Ackerman take over until Cardinals Radio Network coverage starts at 1:40 p.m. and is to include the on-field player introductions. Mike Shannon and John Rooney then have the play-by-play of the game. Afterward there will be plenty of baseball chatter until midnight, and that long block is to include the debut of Chris Hrabe as host of the " Sports Hub " program that starts at 9 p.m. Hrabe, who had been working in Memphis, started at KMOX on Monday and has been on the air in various capacities this week. But because the " Hub " has been pre-empted by Cardinals and Blues broadcasts all week, he has n't yet worked in what will be his most high-profile job at the station. On TV, Fox Sports Midwest 's hour-long pregame show starts at 1:30 p.m. Pat Parris is the host, with analysis provided by former Cardinals center fielder Jim Edmonds - who made his debut in that role Monday. Jim Hayes serves as the reporter. The scene shifts at 2:30 p.m. to the on-field @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ broadcast, FSM has Dan McLaughlin on play-by-play with Al Hrabosky and Rick Horton providing analysis. Birds on KTVI The Cards ' game Saturday, at 3:05 p.m. St. Louis time in San Francisco, will be televised regionally by Fox( KTVI, Channel 2 locally) as the first of eight contests they are scheduled to show on that network. Fox baseball newcomer Justin Kutcher has the play-by-play assignment for the contest, with former Dodgers and Cubs first baseman Eric Karros providing analysis. Kutcher has done college football for Fox and also has worked for the Big Ten Network, NCAA Productions, what now is CBS Sports Network and MLB.com. DOUBLE COVERAGE The Cards are set to play in San Francisco at 3:35 p.m. today( St. Louis time) and the Blues ' home game against Columbus is to begin about 3 hours later, so KMOX and FSM - which have the rights to both - are going to put the Blues on an alternate channel just in case the baseball game drags on. " We 're not @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ said. " The game will be on Y98( KYKY, 98.1 FM) and KMOX. If the Cards run long for some reason, Blues fans will be able to get the entire game. " He said the full Blues broadcast will be on KYKY no matter what happens with baseball. Ditto for Fox Sports Midwest, which plans to place the Blues ' game on its Fox Sport Midwest Plus channel, on which it sends overlapping programming. But it also will run on FSM 's main channel once Cards coverage ends. Like radio, the TV coverage will remain on the secondary channel throughout. Special memories Brian McKenna and Jeff Gordon are taking a few days off their sports show on KXFN( 1380 AM) because McKenna 's mother, Virginia " Ginny " McKenna, passed away this week. And McKenna, who often talked fondly about his mom on the air, has a memorable and heart-warming story involving the two 13 years ago. McKenna, who worked at WGNU( 920 AM) in @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ a rough day he 'd write down his thoughts. One night he wrote that he wanted to be his mom 's Valentine because she had become a widow six years earlier " and she has n't had a Valentine since. " That night, he saw a commercial for the " Oprah Winfrey Show " that asked viewers to send in stories that might be of interest to the TV talk-show host. McKenna submitted what he had just written and said he quickly was contacted by a producer who " said it was one of the most beautiful letters they 've ever seen " and invited him and mom to be on the program. And he kept the best part of the trip a surprise - he told his mom he had won airfare to Chicago and tickets to the program. So it was a shock to her when they were much more than merely in the audience. " The theme of the show is good things in life, ' and near the end of the show Oprah calls my name and tells @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ " My mom cries the whole way up. We both totally Vermeiled, ' " he said in reference to the teary-eyed Rams coach of that era, Dick Vermeil. " Then I had to read part of the letter to my mom. And me, my mom and Oprah - all three of us are crying. " Cinderella for CBS Wichita State, that unheralded school from the Missouri Valley Conference, has crashed the NCAA Tournament 's big party by reaching the Final Four in Atlanta. Still, Wichita State wo n't be in the prime-time slot Saturday despite playing top seed Louisville, of the Big East. CBS set that game for the early slot( 5:10 p.m. St. Louis time). Michigan, of the Big 10, and Syracuse, of the Big East, follow in the marquee time slot. " The Big 10 traditionally brings a lot of television homes into the equation, " CBS Sports chairman Sean McManus said on a conference call this week. " These are always subjective decisions @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ was the right order this year. ' Jim Nantz, who will be doing play-by-play of the Final Four alongside analysts Clark Kellogg and Steve Kerr, likes the field that is led by Louisville. " That is a dynamic, electrifying, spectacular team - it 's going to take a lot for somebody to beat them, " he said on the call of the Cardinals. " But when you look at the mix, you have a Cinderella team in Wichita State. It 's always good to have a Cinderella story going into the Final Four, And you have two teams that are really peaking at the right time that are n't afraid of a big stage, of playing in a big game - Michigan and Syracuse. I 'm excited about what we have. " 
